

Pearson Edexcel GCSE in History 
 
Paper 3: Modern depth study (1HI0/33) 
 
 
Option 33: The USA, 1954–75: conflict at 
home and abroad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mark Scheme  
  
Summer 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications
 
 
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body. We provide a 
wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and specific programmes for 
employers.    For    further    information    visit    our    qualifications    websites    at    www.edexcel.com
 
or www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page 
at www.edexcel.com/contactus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere 
 
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone progress in 
their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they 
are  in  the  world.  We’ve  been  involved  in  education  for  over  150  years,  and  by  working  across  70  
countries,  in  100  languages,  we  have  built  an  international  reputation  for  our  commitment  to  high  
standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can 
help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summer 2019 
Publications Code 1HI0_33_1906_MS 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Ltd 2019 

 
General Marking Guidance 
  
  
• All candidates must receive the same treatment.  Examiners must 
mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the 
last. 
• Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be 
rewarded  for  what  they  have  shown  they  can  do  rather  than  
penalised for omissions. 
• Examiners   should   mark   according   to   the   mark   scheme   not   
according to their perception of where the grade boundaries may 
lie. 
• There is no ceiling on achievement. All marks on the mark scheme 
should be used appropriately. 
• All  the  marks  on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. 
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the 
answer  matches  the  mark  scheme.   Examiners  should  also  be  
prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not 
worthy of credit according to the mark scheme. 
• Where  some  judgement  is  required,  mark  schemes  will  provide  
the principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification 
may be limited. 
• When  examiners  are  in  doubt  regarding  the  application  of  the  
mark scheme to a candidate’s response, the team leader must be 
consulted. 
• Crossed  out  work  should  be  marked  UNLESS  the  candidate  has  
replaced it with an alternative response. 
 
  

 
Modern depth study:  The USA, 1954–75: conflict at home and abroad 
 
Question 
 
1 
Give two things you can infer from Source A about the opposition to the 
desegregation of Little Rock High School.  
Target: Source analysis (making inferences). 
AO3: 4 marks. 
Marking instructions 
Award 1 mark for each valid inference up to a maximum of two inferences. The second mark for each 
example should be awarded for supporting detail selected from the source. 
e.g. 
• Significant military force was needed to control the crowd of protestors (1).There were only 300 
protestors but 350 soldiers (1). 
• There was opposition to desegregation from within the school (1).Six white students walked out in 
protest (1). 
• The opposition to desegregation at Little Rock caused fear. (1). All students had to leave because it 
was believed there was a bomb in the building (1). 
Accept other appropriate alternatives. 
 
  

 
  
Question  
2 
Explain why US involvement in the Vietnam War changed under President Nixon. 
You may use the following in your answer: 
• Vietnamisation 
• bombing of North Vietnam 
You must also use information of your own. 
Target: Analysis of second order concepts: causation [AO2]; 
Knowledge and understanding of features and characteristics [AO1]. 
AO2: 6 marks. 
AO1: 6 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–3 
• A simple or generalised answer is given, lacking development and organisation. 
[AO2]  
• Limited knowledge and understanding of the topic is shown. [AO1] 
2 4–6 
• An explanation is given, showing limited analysis and with implicit or unsustained 
links to the conceptual focus of the question. It shows some development and 
organisation of material, but a line of reasoning is not sustained. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing some knowledge and 
understanding of the period. [AO1] 
Maximum 5 marks for Level 2 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by 
the stimulus points. 
3 7–9 
• An explanation is given, showing some analysis, which is mainly directed at the 
conceptual focus of the question. It shows a line of reasoning that is generally 
sustained, although some passages may lack coherence and organisation. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing good knowledge and 
understanding of the required features or characteristics of the period studied. 
[AO1] 
Maximum 8 marks for Level 3 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by 
the stimulus points. 
4 10–12 
• An analytical explanation is given which is directed consistently at the conceptual 
focus of the question, showing a line of reasoning that is coherent, sustained and 
logically structured. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is precisely selected to address the question 
directly, showing wide-ranging knowledge and understanding of the required 
features or characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
No access to Level 4 for answers which do not go beyond aspects prompted by the 
stimulus points. 

 
 
  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Performance in AO1 and AO2 is interdependent. An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be 
awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should 
note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.  
The middle mark in each level may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. 
Relevant points may include: 
• The US army found itself in a position of stalemate so Vietnamisation was introduced to make the 
South Vietnamese Army more responsible for the fighting.  
• The bombing of North Vietnam in 1972 was supposed to place extra pressure on the North 
Vietnamese to accept peace terms.  
• In    order to gain support in the 1968 presidential election, Nixon had made a pledge of ‘peace with 
honor’, which would require the withdrawal of American soldiers.  
• Nixon needed to keep pressure on North Vietnam so he ordered the secret invasion of Cambodia in 
1970 to take away safe havens for the NVA. 
• President Nixon wanted to reduce American military commitments across the world as set out in the 
Nixon Doctrine in 1969. 
• Nixon was under pressure from protests at home to de-escalate US involvement in the war. 

 
 
Question  
3 (a) 
How useful are Sources B and C for an enquiry into the achievements of the civil 
rights movement in the years 1960-65? 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of source utility. 
AO3: 8 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple judgement on utility is given, and supported by undeveloped 
comment on the content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Simple 
comprehension of the source material is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content. Limited contextual knowledge is deployed with links to the 
sources. 
2 3–5 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, using valid 
criteria. Judgements are supported by developed comment related to the 
content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Comprehension and some 
analysis of the sources is shown by the selection and use of material to support 
comments on their utility. Contextual knowledge is used directly to support 
comments on the usefulness of the content of the sources and/or their 
provenance. 
3 6–8 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, applying valid 
criteria with developed reasoning which takes into account how the 
provenance
1
 affects the usefulness of the source content. The sources are 
analysed to support reasoning about their utility. Contextual knowledge is used 
in the process of interpreting the sources and applying criteria for judgements 
on their utility.  
Notes 
1.   Provenance = nature, origin, purpose 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the sources. 
No credit may be given for generic comments on provenance which are not used to evaluate source 
content. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The grouping 
of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their answers.  
Source B  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The source suggests that the signing of the Civil Rights Act (1964) was a major event and that both 
King and Johnson were proud of this achievement. 
• By presenting Martin Luther King with the pen, Johnson showed he wanted the contribution of the 
civil rights movement to be recognised in shaping the Civil Rights Act (1964). 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The fact that this picture was published on the front pages of several US newspapers helps to show 
the significance of the Civil Rights Act (1964).  
• The photograph is not obviously staged – nobody is facing the camera and it seems to capture a 
conversation taking place. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 

 
  
• Although King and Johnson often had disagreements, King believed that Johnson understood the civil 
rights issue very well. Johnson used his experience in Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act (1964). 
• The Civil Rights Act (1964) brought an end to some aspects of discrimination and segregation. 
However, there were still unresolved issues for the civil rights movement such as voting rights. 
Source C  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The source shows how strong the opposition was to black Americans gaining the vote, for example 
describing the violent actions of the state police. 
• The source details the bravery of the protesters who were aiming to be able to register to vote. 
• The source shows how the civil rights protests at Selma made Johnson decide to    introduce the Voting 
Rights Act of 1965. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• Lewis was a civil rights activist who might have wanted to highlight the violence of the police to show 
how hard the struggle had been to bring about the change in voting rights. 
• Lewis was being interviewed many years after the event so he had the benefit of knowing that voting 
reform soon followed and, therefore, might have placed too much significance on the protests. 
• Lewis was badly injured during the event and he even admits that he finds it hard to remember what 
happened. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• Only 2% of blacks in Alabama had been able to register to vote, which led to these major protests. 
• On Bloody Sunday in 1965, protestors refused to disperse when asked to do so at the Edmund Pettus 
Bridge and were attacked with clubs and chased by mounted police.  

 
Question  
3 (b) 
Study Interpretations 1 and 2. They give different views about the achievements of 
the civil rights movement in the years 1960-65. 
What is the main difference between the views? Explain your answer, using details 
from both interpretations. 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (how they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• Limited analysis of the interpretations is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content, but differences of surface detail only are given, or a difference 
of view is asserted without direct support. 
2 3–4 
 
• The interpretations are analysed and a key difference of view is identified and 
supported from them. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive and other relevant 
material not suggested below must also be credited. 
• A main difference is that Interpretation 1 suggests that the Civil Rights Act (1964) was the main 
achievement of the civil rights movement. Interpretation 2, on the other hand, emphasises that the 
main achievement of the civil rights movement was the Voting Rights Act (1965).  
  

 
Question  
3 (c) 
Suggest one reason why Interpretations 1 and 2 give different views about the 
achievements of the civil rights movement in the years 1960-65. 
You may use Sources B and C to help explain your answer. 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (why they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple valid explanation is offered but displaying only limited analysis. Support 
for the explanation is based on simple undeveloped comment or on the selection 
of details from the provided material or own knowledge, with only implied 
linkage to the explanation. 
2 3–4 
• An explanation of a reason for difference is given, analysing the interpretations. 
The explanation is substantiated effectively.  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive. The examples below 
show different approaches to explaining difference, any one of which may be valid. Other valid material 
must be credited. 
• The interpretations may differ because they have given weight to different sources. For example, 
Source B provides some support for Interpretation 1, which suggests that the main achievement of 
the civil rights movement was the Civil Rights Act (1964), while Source C provides some support for 
Interpretation 2, which suggests the main achievement was the Voting Rights Act (1965). 
• The interpretations may differ because they take different viewpoints.  Interpretation 1 focuses on 
segregation and discrimination in everyday life, while Interpretation 2 focuses more on political 
achievements in terms of voting and democracy. 
• The interpretations may differ because the authors have a different timescale – Interpretation 1 is 
dealing with the impact of protests of 1963; Interpretation 2 is focused on the impact of the 1965 
Selma protest. 
  

 
  
Question  
3 (d) 
How far do you agree with Interpretation 2 about the achievements of the 
civil rights movement in the years 1960-65? 
Explain your answer, using both interpretations, and your knowledge of the 
historical context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of interpretations. 
AO4: 16 marks. 
Spelling, punctuation, grammar and the use of specialist terminology 
(SPaG): up to 4 additional marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–4 
• Answer offers simple valid comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Limited analysis of one interpretation is shown by selection 
and inclusion of some detail in the form of simple paraphrase or direct 
quotation. Generalised contextual knowledge is included and linked to the 
evaluation. 
2 5–8 
• Answer offers valid evaluative comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Some analysis is shown in selecting and including details 
from both interpretations to support this comment. Some relevant 
contextual knowledge is included and linked to the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given but its justification is insecure or undeveloped and a 
line of reasoning is not sustained. 
3 9–12 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation, agreeing or disagreeing with the 
interpretation. Good analysis of the interpretations is shown indicating 
difference of view and deploying this to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is used directly to support the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given with some justification and a line of reasoning is 
generally sustained. 
4 13–16 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation reviewing the alternative views in 
coming to a substantiated judgement. Precise analysis of the 
interpretations is shown, indicating how the differences of view are 
conveyed and deploying this material to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is precisely selected to support the evaluation. An 
overall judgment is justified and the line of reasoning is coherent, 
sustained and logically structured. 
Marks for SPaG 
Performanc
e 
Mark Descriptor 
 0 
• The learner writes nothing. 
• The learner’s response does not relate to the question. 
• The learner’s achievement in SPaG does not reach the threshold 
performance level, e.g. errors in spelling, punctuation and grammar 
severely hinder meaning. 
Threshold 1 
• Learners spell and punctuate with reasonable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with some control of meaning and any 
errors do not significantly hinder meaning overall.  
• Learners use a limited range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
Intermediate 2–3 
• Learners spell and punctuate with considerable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with general control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a good range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
High 4 
• Learners spell and punctuate with consistent accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with effective control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a wide range of specialist terms as appropriate. 

 
 
 
 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828 with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, 
United Kingdom 
 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the interpretations. 
In all levels, the second sentence relates to analysis and while the rest relate to evaluation. The 
following rules will apply: 
• In Level 1, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis without evidence of 
evaluation should be awarded 1 mark. 
• In other levels, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis (but that also fully 
meet the descriptors for evaluation of the level below) should be awarded no more than the bottom 
mark in the level. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The 
grouping of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their 
answers.  
The interpretation to be evaluated suggests that the Voting Rights Act (1965) was the main 
achievement of the civil rights movement in the years 1960-65. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which support the claim made in the 
interpretation may include: 
• Interpretation 2 shows that methods used to prevent African Americans in the South from voting, 
such as literacy tests, were removed by the Voting Rights Act (1965). 
• Interpretation 2 suggests that by making the South more democratic, the civil rights movement 
had achieved its main goal. 
• Although President Johnson had been sympathetic he didn’t believe that he could succeed in 
getting a voting rights act through Congress until the Selma protests persuaded him otherwise.  
• The struggle for voting rights was very dangerous. For example, three students working on a voter 
registration project in the summer of 1964 had been murdered.  
• Black voter registrations increased dramatically because of the Voting Rights Act (1965) creating 
the possibility that many more African Americans could be elected to positions of political power. 
 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which counter the view may include:  
• Interpretation 1 suggests that key aims of the civil rights movement were achieved by the Civil 
Rights Act (1964), e.g. the removal of segregation. 
• Interpretation 1 suggests that the Civil Rights Act (1964) validated the activities of the civil rights 
movement, such as the protests in Birmingham (1963). 
• The passing of the Civil Rights Act (1964) finally dealt with Southern politicians who had obstructed 
court rulings by opposing such judgements through legislation. 
• The Civil Rights Act (1964) gave the federal government stronger authority to desegregate schools. 
• The Freedom Ride campaign in 1961 effectively brought about the desegregation of inter-state 
buses, successfully supporting a court ruling.   
 