

Mark Scheme (Results) 
 
 
November 2020 
 
Pearson Edexcel GCSE 
In History (1HI0) 
Paper 33: Modern depth study (1HI0) 
 
Option 33: The USA, 1954–75: conflict at 
home and abroad  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications 
 
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body. We provide 
a  wide  range  of  qualifications  including  academic,  vocational,  occupational  and  specific  programmes 
for  employers.  For  further  information  visit  our  qualifications  websites  at www.edexcel.com or 
www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at 
www.edexcel.com/contactus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere 
 
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone progress in 
their  lives  through  education.  We  believe  in  every  kind  of  learning,  for  all  kinds  of  people,  wherever 
they are in the world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150 years, and by working across 70 
countries,  in  100  languages,  we  have  built  an  international  reputation  for  our  commitment  to  high 
standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can 
help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Autumn 2020 
Publications Code 1HI0_33_2011_MS 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Ltd 2020 
  

 
 
General Marking Guidance 
  
  
• All candidates  must  receive  the  same  treatment.  Examiners 
must  mark  the  first  candidate  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  they 
mark the last. 
• Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be 
rewarded  for  what  they  have  shown  they  can  do  rather  than 
penalised for omissions. 
• Examiners  should   mark  according   to   the  mark   scheme   not 
according  to  their  perception  of  where  the  grade  boundaries 
may lie. 
• There  is  no  ceiling  on  achievement.  All  marks  on  the  mark 
scheme should be used appropriately. 
• All  the  marks on the mark  scheme are  designed  to  be awarded. 
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the 
answer  matches  the  mark  scheme.  Examiners  should  also  be 
prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not 
worthy of credit according to the mark scheme. 
• Where  some  judgement  is  required,  mark  schemes  will  provide 
the    principles    by    which    marks    will    be    awarded    and 
exemplification may be limited. 
• When  examiners  are  in  doubt  regarding  the  application  of  the 
mark scheme to a candidate’s response,  the  team  leader  must 
be consulted. 
• Crossed  out  work  should  be  marked  UNLESS  the  candidate  has 
replaced it with an alternative response. 
 
 
  

 
Modern depth study: The USA, 1954–75: conflict at home and abroad 
 
Question 
 
1 
Give two things you can infer from Source A about the March on Washington (1963). 
Target: Source analysis (making inferences). 
AO3: 4 marks. 
Marking instructions 
Award 1 mark for each valid inference up to a maximum of two inferences. The second mark for each 
example should be awarded for supporting detail selected from the source. 
e.g. 
• The march was multi-racial (1). There are both black and white people in the crowd (1). 
• The crowd appears to be united (1). Some of the marchers are holding hands (1). 
• The March on Washington involved people from different backgrounds (1). Some people are wearing 
suits while others are wearing less formal clothes (1). 
Accept other appropriate alternatives. 
 
  

 
  
Question  
2 
Explain why there was opposition to the civil rights movement in the years 1954–60.  
You may use the following in your answer: 
• Ku Klux Klan 
• Dixiecrats 
You must also use information of your own. 
Target: Analysis of second order concepts: causation [AO2]; 
Knowledge and understanding of features and characteristics [AO1]. 
AO2: 6 marks. 
AO1: 6 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–3 
• A simple or generalised answer is given, lacking development and organisation. 
[AO2]  
• Limited knowledge and understanding of the topic is shown. [AO1] 
2 4–6 
• An explanation is given, showing limited analysis and with implicit or unsustained 
links to the conceptual focus of the question. It shows some development and 
organisation of material, but a line of reasoning is not sustained. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing some knowledge and 
understanding of the period. [AO1] 
Maximum 5 marks for Level 2 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by 
the stimulus points. 
3 7–9 
• An explanation is given, showing some analysis, which is mainly directed at the 
conceptual focus of the question. It shows a line of reasoning that is generally 
sustained, although some passages may lack coherence and organisation. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing good knowledge and 
understanding of the required features or characteristics of the period studied. 
[AO1] 
Maximum 8 marks for Level 3 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by 
the stimulus points. 
4 10–12 
• An analytical explanation is given which is directed consistently at the conceptual 
focus of the question, showing a line of reasoning that is coherent, sustained and 
logically structured. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is precisely selected to address the question 
directly, showing wide-ranging knowledge and understanding of the required 
features or characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
No access to Level 4 for answers which do not go beyond aspects prompted by the 
stimulus points. 

 
 
  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Performance in AO1 and AO2 is interdependent. An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be 
awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should 
note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.  
The middle mark in each level may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. 
Relevant points may include: 
• The Ku Klux Klan were committed to violent resistance of the civil rights movement because of their 
beliefs in white supremacy and segregation. They frequently attacked and murdered civil rights 
campaigners. 
• The civil rights movement faced strong political opposition in Congress because the ‘Dixiecrats’, who 
wanted to defend segregation in the South, opposed civil rights legislation. 
• Whites in the South were strongly opposed to anyone challenging the status quo, making the South a 
dangerous place for anyone who did not accept its customs. Emmett Till was murdered in 1955 when 
he ‘wolf-whistled’ a white woman in a store. 
• Opposition to the civil rights movement increased as a reaction against the desegregation of schools. 
White Citizens Councils were created to stop desegregation and oppose the civil rights movement. 
• Many state authorities and white communities resented federal government interference in local 
matters.  

 
Question  
3 (a) 
How useful are Sources B and C for an enquiry into the reasons for 
the failure of the USA in Vietnam? Explain your answer, using 
Sources B and C and your knowledge of the historical context. 
 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of source utility. 
AO3: 8 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple judgement on utility is given, and supported by undeveloped 
comment on the content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Simple 
comprehension of the source material is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content. Limited contextual knowledge is deployed with links to the 
sources. 
2 3–5 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, using valid 
criteria. Judgements are supported by developed comment related to the 
content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Comprehension and some 
analysis of the sources is shown by the selection and use of material to support 
comments on their utility. Contextual knowledge is used directly to support 
comments on the usefulness of the content of the sources and/or their 
provenance. 
3 6–8 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, applying valid 
criteria with developed reasoning which takes into account how the 
provenance
1
 affects the usefulness of the source content. The sources are 
analysed to support reasoning about their utility. Contextual knowledge is used 
in the process of interpreting the sources and applying criteria for judgements 
on their utility.  
Notes 
1. Provenance = nature, origin, purpose. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the sources. 
No credit may be given for generic comments on provenance which are not used to evaluate source 
content. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The grouping 
of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their answers.  
Source B  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The source indicates that the US government knew that the bombing of North Vietnam and other 
military targets was not helping to win the war. 
• The source claims that the American attempt to break the determination of North Vietnam was 
failing. 
• The source states that the American bombing could not prevent military supplies being transported to 
South Vietnam to be used by communist forces. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• These confidential documents were not published at the time so they are likely to be an honest 
appraisal of the American strategy in Vietnam rather than the more positive comments made 
available to the public. 
• The purpose of the documents was to provide realistic information of the true situation in Vietnam in 
1966 to the US government. 

 
  
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• Operation Rolling Thunder involved the sustained bombing of targets in North Vietnam and along the 
Ho Chi Minh Trail from 1965 until 1968, costing over $900 million and the loss of over 900 US 
aircraft. 
• Attempts to disrupt the Ho Chi Minh Trail failed because the VC and North Vietnamese were able to 
repair the trail or find alternative routes. Provision of supplies from China and Russia also meant that 
the bombing of industrial areas had a limited effect. 
Source C  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The source suggests that the effectiveness of American soldiers was weakened by poor discipline and 
drug use.  
• The source indicates that American soldiers were so undisciplined that they killed their own officers if 
they did not like them. 
• The source suggests that infighting and weak morale among American soldiers caused them to lose 
commitment. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The soldier is describing his first-hand experiences of the loss of morale in the latter part of the war.  
• The soldier was able to speak honestly about his experiences because he was no longer in the army 
and the war was over. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• Cases of the ‘fragging’ of officers, who risked the lives of their men, peaked towards the end of the 
Vietnam War. 
• Most American soldiers were in Vietnam for a 12-month ‘tour of duty.’ Many ‘counted the days’ until 
they were able to go home. 

 
Question  
3 (b) 
Study Interpretations 1 and 2. They give different views about the reasons for the 
failure of the USA in Vietnam. What is the main difference between these views? 
Explain your answer, using details from both interpretations.  
Target: Analysis of interpretations (how they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• Limited analysis of the interpretations is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content, but differences of surface detail only are given, or a difference 
of view is asserted without direct support. 
2 3–4 
 
• The interpretations are analysed and a key difference of view is identified and 
supported from them. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive and other relevant 
material not suggested below must also be credited. 
• A main difference is that Interpretation 1 suggests that US tactics, such as bombing operations, 
failed to bring the Americans victory in Vietnam. Interpretation 2, on the other hand, emphasises 
that the American army was weakened by a lack of morale. 
  

 
Question  
3 (c) 
Suggest one reason why Interpretations 1 and 2 give different views about the 
reasons for the failure of the USA in Vietnam. You may use Sources B and C to help 
explain your answer.  
Target: Analysis of interpretations (why they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple valid explanation is offered but displaying only limited analysis. Support 
for the explanation is based on simple undeveloped comment or on the selection 
of details from the provided material or own knowledge, with only implied 
linkage to the explanation. 
2 3–4 
• An explanation of a reason for difference is given, analysing the interpretations. 
The explanation is substantiated effectively.  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive. The examples below 
show different approaches to explaining difference, any one of which may be valid. Other valid material 
must be credited. 
• The interpretations may differ because they have given weight to different sources. For example, 
Source B provides evidence for the strategic failures of US bombing, which provides some support 
for Interpretation 1, while Source C provides evidence for the deteriorating morale of American 
soldiers, which provides some support for Interpretation 2.  
• The interpretations may differ because they take different viewpoints. Interpretation 1 focuses on 
the resilience of the communist forces, while Interpretation 2 focuses more on the weaknesses of 
the Americans. 
• They may differ because the authors have chosen to place an emphasis on different details. 
Interpretation 1 is dealing with the details of military operations, while Interpretation 2 focuses on 
the experiences of American soldiers in Vietnam. 
  

 
  
Question  
3 (d) 
How far do you agree with Interpretation 2 about the reasons for the failure of 
the USA in Vietnam? Explain your answer, using both interpretations, and 
your knowledge of the historical context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of interpretations. 
AO4: 16 marks. 
Spelling, punctuation, grammar and the use of specialist terminology 
(SPaG): up to 4 additional marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–4 
• Answer offers simple valid comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Limited analysis of one interpretation is shown by selection 
and inclusion of some detail in the form of simple paraphrase or direct 
quotation. Generalised contextual knowledge is included and linked to the 
evaluation. 
2 5–8 
• Answer offers valid evaluative comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Some analysis is shown in selecting and including details 
from both interpretations to support this comment. Some relevant 
contextual knowledge is included and linked to the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given but its justification is insecure or undeveloped and a 
line of reasoning is not sustained. 
3 9–12 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation, agreeing or disagreeing with the 
interpretation. Good analysis of the interpretations is shown indicating 
difference of view and deploying this to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is used directly to support the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given with some justification and a line of reasoning is 
generally sustained. 
4 13–16 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation reviewing the alternative views in 
coming to a substantiated judgement. Precise analysis of the 
interpretations is shown, indicating how the differences of view are 
conveyed and deploying this material to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is precisely selected to support the evaluation. An 
overall judgment is justified and the line of reasoning is coherent, 
sustained and logically structured. 
Marks for SPaG 
Performanc
e 
Mark Descriptor 
 0 
• The learner writes nothing. 
• The learner’s response does not relate to the question. 
• The learner’s achievement in SPaG does not reach the threshold 
performance level, e.g. errors in spelling, punctuation and grammar 
severely hinder meaning. 
Threshold 1 
• Learners spell and punctuate with reasonable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with some control of meaning and any 
errors do not significantly hinder meaning overall.  
• Learners use a limited range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
Intermediate 2–3 
• Learners spell and punctuate with considerable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with general control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a good range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
High 4 
• Learners spell and punctuate with consistent accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with effective control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a wide range of specialist terms as appropriate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the interpretations. 
In all levels, the second sentence relates to analysis and while the rest relate to evaluation. The 
following rules will apply: 
• In Level 1, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis without evidence of 
evaluation should be awarded 1 mark. 
• In other levels, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis (but that also fully 
meet the descriptors for evaluation of the level below) should be awarded no more than the bottom 
mark in the level. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The 
grouping of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their 
answers.  
The interpretation to be evaluated suggests that a reason for the failure of the USA was the loss of 
morale among American soldiers.   
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which support the claim made in the 
interpretation may include: 
• Interpretation 2 states that conscripted soldiers were not sufficiently determined to fight in 
Vietnam. 
• Interpretation 2 suggests that the American army was weakened by a range of problems such as 
drug use and desertions. 
• The Americans had to supply so many soldiers to fight in Vietnam that they could not rely on 
volunteers. Around one-third of men serving in Vietnam were conscripts. 
• American ill-discipline led to events such as the My Lai Massacre which weakened the American 
position in Vietnam.  
• Tensions in the army reflected some of the struggles going on at home in the USA, especially the 
growth of the anti-war movement. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which counter the view may include:  
• Interpretation 1 states that the failure of Operation Rolling Thunder meant that the US could not 
cut off supplies to communist fighters in the South. 
• Interpretation 1 shows that although the USA had assumed that bombing would succeed in bringing 
about a communist defeat, however many bombs were dropped during the campaign, they could 
not break enemy resistance.  
• Operation Rolling Thunder was a very costly campaign with the Americans spending approximately 
$10 on bombs for every $1 dollar of damage to North Vietnam. 
• US officials continued to believe that increased bombing would be decisive in bringing about an end 
to the war but they could not target Chinese and Russian aid to the North in case the war 
escalated. 
• Other reasons included the strength of North Vietnam and the impact of the opposition to the war 
in the USA.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828  
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom 
 
 