

Examiners’ Report 
June 2022
GCSE History 1HIA 33

Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications come from Pearson, the UK's largest awarding body. We 
provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and 
specific programmes for employers. For further information visit our qualifications websites 
at www.edexcel.com or www.btec.co.uk.
Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at 
www.edexcel.com/contactus.
Giving you insight to inform next steps
ResultsPlus is Pearson's free online service giving instant and detailed analysis of your 
students' exam results.
See students' scores for every exam question.
Understand how your students' performance compares with class and national averages.
Identify potential topics, skills and types of question where students may need to develop 
their learning further.
For more information on ResultsPlus, or to log in, visit www.edexcel.com/resultsplus. Your 
exams officer will be able to set up your ResultsPlus account in minutes via Edexcel Online.
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone 
progress in their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of 
people, wherever they are in the world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150 years, 
and by working across 70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an international 
reputation for our commitment to high standards and raising achievement through 
innovation in education. Find out more about how we can help you and your students at: 
www.pearson.com/uk.
June 2022
Publications Code 1HIA_33_2206_ER
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Ltd 2022
2GCSE History 1HIA 33

Introduction
It was pleasing to see that students seemed confident in tackling this paper after a three-year 
gap in formal examinations. They coped well with the range of question styles, which covered 
all four Assessment Objectives, and they responded particularly well to the enquiry ‘package’ 
in question 3.
The answer space provided is intended to be sufficient for the question to be answered in full 
and although some students did write on extra sheets they were not always as successful as 
those who produced more concise answers. Where additional space is needed, it is 
important that students clearly state that the answer is continued on paper.
Questions on this paper cover all the Assessment Objectives but over half of the available 
marks are for question 3, which focuses on sources and interpretations. These questions 
form a coherent package leading to a final question in which students, having explored the 
utility of the provided sources, analysed the different views presented in the interpretations 
and the reasons for those differences, and are then invited to judge the extent to which they 
agree with one of the interpretations. It is therefore important that students appreciate the 
differ  ence between sources and interpretations, and the focus of different parts of  
question 3.
The focus in 3(c) is on why the interpretations might differ and the specific areas of weakness 
explained below should be read carefully. It is not possible to provide effectively 
substantiated reasons why the interpretations are different based on such things as where 
and when the interpretations were published although a small number of students did 
attempt to do so without success – (see specific information about 3(c) below).
Question 3(d) carries the highest number of marks on the paper. Successful students will 
have already seen how the views in the interpretations are different, why this might be the 
case and, in completing 3(a) have understood that there is likely to be evidence in support of 
both interpretations. They are now asked how far they agree with one of the interpretations. 
The strongest answers to 3(d), therefore, focused clearly on the interpretations themselves, 
reviewing the alternative views and coming to a substantiated judgement. Students who 
focused exclusively on the view provided in Interpretation 2 and used this as a basis for an 
essay based on their own knowledge were less successful than those who considered the 
alternative views from both interpretations. There is no expectation that both interpretations 
are dealt with in equal depth but both should be examined explicitly. The use of contextual 
knowledge is an important element in this evaluation but it must be precisely selected to 
support the evaluation and not just used to display knowledge of aspects of the topic which 
the student has revised but are not relevant to the enquiry. In addition, some of the strongest 
answers were able to show how the differences of view in the two interpretations were 
conveyed in reaching their overall judgements.
3GCSE History 1HIA 33

Examiners reported some impressive answers to 3(d) and many students were able to 
engage confidently with the interpretations, taking a range of approaches. However, this 
question was accessible to all students and even those who did not score highly understood 
the need to offer evaluative responses leading to an overall conclusion. Only a few students 
were unable to identify the view being offered by the interpretations, so the majority were 
able to construct a response in relation to these views. Students rarely seemed rushed and 
full answers were generally provided showing that timing wasn’t generally an issue on this 
paper.
4GCSE History 1HIA 33

Question 1
This question requires students to make two inferences from a source and it is often 
regarded as an ‘easy’ question. However, students need to be sure that the inferences they 
make are valid inferences and not just paraphrases of the content of the source.
The focus of the question was about Search and Destroy missions in Vietnam. There were 
two marks available for each valid inference – one for the inference itself and one for the 
supporting information. Most students seemed to understand how to make an inference, 
and most used the content of the source to provide support for the inference. Such students 
tended to make inferences about how fearful the soldiers on these missions were, which 
could be referenced by ‘You didn’t know if your next step would be your last’. However, a 
significant minority of inferences focused on the tactics of the Vietcong which was not the 
focus of the question. A small number of students wrote a lot about why their supporting 
information helped to support the inference, which is not required and did not gain any extra 
marks but possibly wasted time.
5GCSE History 1HIA 33

This student has made two inferences about Search and Destroy 
missions supported by direct reference to the source, so gains full 
marks.
Think about the space provided – inferences do not need to be 
explained in great detail and a single sentence is enough.
6GCSE History 1HIA 33

Neither of the inferences in this response relates to the Search and 
Destroy missions. They are both about the tactics of the Vietcong.
Students should ensure the inference is about the focus of the 
question.
7GCSE History 1HIA 33

Question 2
In question 2, the focus will always be on causation but the question does not require a 
judgement to be made or for the answer to prioritise or show interaction of factors and no 
marks were available to reward this evaluation, however strongly argued. Instead, the most 
successful students showed a consistent analytical focus throughout their answers and many 
were able to access Level 4 by doing so.
In question 2 the stimulus points in the question will often be useful reminders to students 
of specific areas of content which they can write about. Students do not need to use these 
stimulus points but there is an expectation that there will be some depth of knowledge, 
shown by three discrete aspects of content being covered, although this does not mean 
students need to identify three different causes or events.
A number of answers remained at Level 3, despite excellent knowledge, because they missed 
the focus of the question. The mark scheme’s bullet point for Assessment Objective 2 
(analysis) at Level 4 expects an analytical explanation, directed consistently at the conceptual 
focus of the question. Students who responded to the topic rather than the key idea were 
unlikely to achieve high marks. Those who did reach Level 4 realised that the topic provides 
the context but that there is a specific focus, which the analysis should address.
Many students performed well on this question and the majority of students were able to go 
beyond the stimulus points, with reference to three aspects of content, and relate these to 
the question. It was noteworthy that even students with more limited knowledge of the 
content were often able to provide a clear structure in their answers, if not a clear analytical 
focus. The stimulus points are provided to help students to link the question they have been 
asked with the material they have studied and to provide a prompt to the analysis of the 
process of change.
The majority of students were confident in discussing the media coverage of the My Lai 
Massacre and the events at Kent State University as reasons for opposition to the war in 
Vietnam and many were also aware of how increasing awareness of the difficult fighting 
conditions and the use of the draft led to opposition.
Some knowledgeable students failed to score highly because they did not properly address 
the focus of the question. This was not a question about the nature of the opposition, but 
was about the reasons for the opposition to the Vietnam War. Some answers focused on a 
description of the opposition and were therefore unlikely to achieve high marks in 
Assessment Objective 2, as they were not addressing the conceptual focus of the question – 
causation. Some students discussed the Tet Offensive but did not link it to increasing 
opposition. They described the events but were not clear about how they led to increasing 
opposition to the war. A minority of students did not look carefully at the time frame and 
wrote about Kennedy’s approach to the war.
8GCSE History 1HIA 33

At Level 2, students often described the opposition to the war in Vietnam which left links to 
the question implicit, which fits Level 2 for the AO2 focus on analysis. At Level 3 students 
were mainly focused on the conceptual focus of the question but sometimes lacked the 
wide-ranging knowledge required at Level 4. At Level 4 there were many sustained analytical 
responses supported by well-chosen examples which displayed clear understanding of the 
precise question and these were often rewarded with full marks.
9GCSE History 1HIA 33

10GCSE History 1HIA 33

11GCSE History 1HIA 33

The student has covered three areas of content (Operation Rolling 
Thunder, My Lai Massacre and Kent State university) and has, 
therefore, satisfied the requirements for higher marks in Assessment 
Objective 1 to go beyond the stimulus points and to show wide-ranging 
knowledge. The quality of analysis meets the demands of the mark 
scheme for Level 3 at Assessment Objective 2. Links are made to the 
focus of the question at the start of each paragraph but the analysis is 
not consistently focused on the conceptual focus of the question. Best-
fit gives this student a mark towards the bottom of Level 4.
Keep the analysis linked to the question all the way through the 
answer and make sure that detail is being used to support the analysis, 
rather than being provided simply as information.
12GCSE History 1HIA 33

13GCSE History 1HIA 33

The answer provides an explanation covering 3 aspects of content 
which is mainly directed at the conceptual focus of the question. 
However, although accurate and relevant information is used, it is not 
consistently at Level 3. The first and third paragraphs show some 
knowledge, whereas the second paragraph shows good knowledge. 
Level 3 was achieved in both Assessment Objectives, though less 
securely for Assessment Objective 1. This led to a mark in the middle 
of Level 3.
Organising the answer into paragraphs makes it clear to the examiner 
that three aspects of content have been covered. A sentence at the 
end of each section showing how it helps to answer the question can 
help to raise the AO2 level in an answer.
14GCSE History 1HIA 33

Question 3 (a)
In question 3(a) students are expected to evaluate the usefulness of the content, taking 
account of the provenance of the sources and applying contextual knowledge in making 
judgements about the utility of the sources as evidence for the specific enquiry, in this case 
the methods used by the Black Panther movement. These strands are linked and should be 
dealt with together, rather than in isolation. There is no need to compare the two sources 
and, indeed, only a handful of students did attempt to do this.
Students found the sources accessible and were confident in showing that the content of the 
sources was relevant for the enquiry and therefore useful. They could also make a number of 
points about the significance of the provenance for the usefulness of the content, although 
sometimes this consisted of simple statements rather than a developed explanation. When 
considering provenance, generic comments about a source being biased (with no 
explanation of how that bias could be detected or why it occurred) or about the source being 
reliable because it came from the time under investigation, could be made without any 
reference to the individual source and therefore remained at Level 1. This type of generic 
assumption was seen when some answers assumed that the authors of the sources would 
be biased or that the accuracy of both sources was high as they were written by people who 
were there at the time.
At Level 2, developed comments were made about the content of the sources, for example, 
the fact that in Source B, Seale is discussing the use of armed patrols to confront the police, 
and in Source C the newspaper article mentions the community support programmes built 
up by the Black Panther Party. There were also good comments made about the provenance 
of the sources – that Source C, being a newspaper distributed by the Black Panther Party, 
may be propaganda exaggerating certain methods to attract support.
Some very good answers could not access the higher marks because they did not include 
contextual knowledge. Contextual knowledge is mentioned at every level of the mark scheme 
and failure to include it limited a number of otherwise good answers. Students should 
recognise that it is not enough to repeat a detail from the source and assert that this can be 
confirmed from the student’s own knowledge or to give generalised comments such as ‘I 
know that the Black Panthers supported education’ – some additional detail is needed as a 
demonstration of that own knowledge. Contextual knowledge should be relevant to the 
enquiry and used to assess the source, for example, to add detail about something 
mentioned in the source, to add weight to an aspect of the provenance, to place the source 
in a broader context, or to assess whether the source gave an accurate view or showed a 
typical situation.
At Level 3, comments need to consider the effect of an aspect of the provenance on the 
usefulness of the source content, and contextual knowledge should be integrated into the 
process of reaching a judgement, not simply provided as information.
15GCSE History 1HIA 33

In this question, the focus should be on assessing the usefulness of what is in the source 
rather than listing details which are not mentioned. Since the question asks students to 
evaluate the usefulness of a source, it can be valid to note the limitations of a source but 
these points need to be used in an overall evaluation of the usefulness of the source; an 
answer which focuses on ‘missing’ information without weighing the positive aspects of the 
source, is unlikely to score highly. Sources should not be dismissed because they do not 
cover every detail that might be helpful in an investigation and students should recognise 
that unreliable sources can be very useful. If the answer identifies omissions from the source 
as limitations on its usefulness, this should be linked to a consideration of the provenance, 
showing whether this is the result of lack of knowledge or deliberate omission.
The question asks ‘how useful’ the sources are, so a judgement should be made on the 
usefulness of the source’s evidence for the specific enquiry. Good answers made clear the 
criteria being used to assess the usefulness for the enquiry of the sources, weighing the 
value of the content in the light of the provenance and the student’s own knowledge. Various 
criteria could be used, for example accuracy of detail, reliability, the relevance of the source, 
the way it could be used by the historian, how representative the source is etc. and good 
students recognised that a source which is regarded as unreliable can be extremely useful to 
the historian.
Although a judgement should be reached on the overall usefulness of each source, there is 
no requirement to compare the sources or to use them in combination and no marks are 
available for this. Students who focused on comparisons between the sources often failed to 
develop their judgement on each source properly; if this approach is used, it is important 
that the answer still comes to a judgement on each individual source.
Very few answers only considered one source but it should be noted that every level of the 
mark scheme refers to ‘sources’ and therefore answers which do not consider both sources 
cannot access high marks.
16GCSE History 1HIA 33

17GCSE History 1HIA 33

18GCSE History 1HIA 33

The student applies their own knowledge to test the accuracy of 
elements of the content of the sources. They also evaluate the 
provenance and how, especially in Source C, this may have an impact 
on the usefulness of the content. This answer achieved a Level 3 mark.
Comments about the usefulness of a source should take into account 
how the provenance affects the usefulness of the source content.
19GCSE History 1HIA 33

20GCSE History 1HIA 33

At Level 2 students will make developed comments related to the 
content of the sources and/or their provenance. In this case the 
student makes valid comments testing the content of the source 
against their own knowledge to assess its accuracy. The mark is limited 
to Level 2 as the student does not develop the statements made about 
the provenance of the sources.
Students using precise knowledge to support points about the specific 
aspects of the source will always perform better than those who just 
use this question to write about the topic.
21GCSE History 1HIA 33

Question 3 (b)
In this question, students are asked to identify a difference in the overall view being offered 
in the interpretations; these do not necessarily contradict each other but they do provide 
alternative views. The answers should identify the key difference but also provide support 
from each interpretation to demonstrate that difference. Many answers recognised that the 
two interpretations offered different views about the methods used by the Black Panther 
movement and could select detail from the two interpretations to support the explanation of 
that difference.
It is important for students to remember that the focus of this question is to identify the 
differ  ences between the views rather than identifying differences of surface detail as the 
latter can only be awarded marks in Level 1. Responses which asserted differences without 
support, for example stating that Interpretation 1 emphasises the methods used by the Black 
Panthers that focused on confronting the police to prevent acts of brutality, whereas 
Interpretation 2 emphasises the social work carried out by the movement, stayed in Level 1.
Level 2 was achieved when the students indicted a clear difference of view and supported it 
with detail from the extracts. Most students were able to score full marks.
22GCSE History 1HIA 33

This answer clearly states the main difference of view between the 
interpretations and supports this with extracts from the 
interpretations and, as a result, gets full marks.
It is not necessary to write a lengthy answer to achieve full marks.
23GCSE History 1HIA 33

This student selects details from both interpretations to illustrate an 
implicit difference. The difference is not clearly stated, therefore the 
answer stays in Level 1.
Students must identify the difference between the interpretations in 
respect to the given enquiry.
24GCSE History 1HIA 33

Question 3 (c)
It is important that students recognise the relationship between questions 3(b) and 3(c). 
Having identified that the two interpretations offer different views, students are asked to 
suggest a reason why these different views have been reached. They should be able to 
support their answer with reference to the interpretations. Examiners see each answer 
separately and therefore cannot be expected to know what has been said in a previous 
answer. For this reason, students should be explicit in their references to the interpretations. 
They should also make sure that their answer to 3(c) does not simply repeat their answer to 
3(b).
The focus here is on the process by which the historian produces their interpretation. Where 
answers suggested that when carrying out research, the authors had placed weight on 
differ  ent sources, students could easily score the full 4 marks by linking details in the 
interpretations with details in Sources B and C. However, this should be explained with 
references to both the interpretations and the sources rather than simply stating that ‘the 
author of Interpretation 1 might have used Source B’.
Alternative explanations also recognise that the historian’s emphasis may affect their 
research and conclusions. For example, whether an historian deals only with short term 
methods to stop police brutality or methods to create long-term social improvements.
Here again, the explanation needs to be supported by the use of the interpretations. In trying 
to give an explanation for a reason for the difference between interpretations some students 
are still attempting to use the provenance of the interpretations to provide this explanation 
and this is unlikely to provide a valid basis for a response to this question. The full reasons 
for this are explained in the Getting Started Guide on pp 43-44. There is also some additional 
guidance in the 2019 Examiners’ Report on p.25. As stated in Getting Started: ‘Students should 
distinguish between their comments on contemporary sources and on these texts. 
Responses based on matters such as the origin or time of production of these secondary 
works are unlikely to be valid for this question.’ However, it is very pleasing to note that many 
fewer students than in previous years tried to provide explanations for difference on the 
basis of such factors as the titles of the books, their origin or date of production. There were 
still a small number of students who gained no marks on this question as they merely 
repeated what had been said in question 3(b).
25GCSE History 1HIA 33

This student has gained full marks by explaining how the writers may 
have different views as they have given weight to different pieces of 
evidence. They evidence that by referring to the interpretations and 
the sources and therefore achieve a mark in Level 2.
Students must be able to provide evidence for the reason they have 
given for the difference in view
26GCSE History 1HIA 33

This student has suggested that a difference in focus is the reason for 
the differing interpretations but has not adequately supported that 
comment with evidence. The mark therefore stays in Level 1.
27GCSE History 1HIA 33

Question 3 (d)
Question 3(d) carries the highest number of marks on the paper. Successful students will 
have already seen how the views in the interpretations are different, why this might be the 
case and, in completing 3(a) have understood that there is likely to be evidence in support of 
both interpretations. They are now asked how far they agree with one of the interpretations. 
The strongest answers to 3(d), therefore, focused clearly on the interpretations themselves, 
reviewing the alternative views and coming to a substantiated judgement. Students need to 
recognise that they are not being asked to treat the interpretation as a source and evaluate 
its reliability or usefulness but to explain whether they think the historian has offered a valid 
view.
However, a small number of answers attempted to discuss the actions of all protest 
movements with very little reference to the interpretations. This approach misses the focus 
of the question, which is about making a judgement on the view offered in Interpretation 2. 
There is no expectation that both interpretations are dealt with in equal depth but both 
should be examined explicitly. The use of contextual knowledge is an important element in 
this evaluation but it must be precisely selected to support the evaluation of the 
interpretation.
Examiners reported some impressive answers to 3(d) and many students were able to 
engage confidently with the interpretations, taking a range of approaches. In addition, some 
of the strongest answers were able to show how the differences of view in the two 
interpretations were conveyed, for example through the use of language, tone, selection or 
omission of detail, emphasis created by the structure of the interpretation, etc.
It is expected that students will reach a judgement when answering this question and the 
strongest students developed their evaluation throughout the answer, creating a consistently 
argued response. Less successful answers offered points to support the views expressed in 
Interpretation 2, then used Interpretation 1 to challenge those views, before reaching the 
view that Interpretation 2 was ‘somewhat accurate’ or saying that they ‘partially agreed with 
the view in Interpretation 2. In these answers, there was little sense of evaluation, simply an 
explanation of the different views, with the acknowledgement that each had some valid 
points. The strongest answers to question 3(d), therefore, focused clearly on the 
interpretations themselves, integrating evaluation while reviewing the alternative views and 
coming to a substantiated judgement.
28GCSE History 1HIA 33

The selection of contextual knowledge to support the evaluation was often a strong aspect of 
students’ responses with most students showing a good awareness of how to deploy their 
knowledge as well as being in possession of an appropriate level of detail. It was pleasing to 
note that there were very few responses which focused primarily on providing contextual 
knowledge for its own sake and that students showed an awareness of how to use their 
knowledge to help them decide on the validity of views selected from the interpretations. A 
small number of students were unable to apply their own knowledge effectively. Merely 
asserting agreement with points in the interpretation by saying ‘from my own knowledge I 
know this to be true’ is not sufficient evidence of contextual knowledge.
Yet a full range of responses suggest this question was accessible to students of all ability 
and full answers were generally provided showing that timing wasn’t generally an issue on 
this paper. Students who focused exclusively on the view provided in interpretation 2 and 
used this as a basis for an essay based on their own knowledge were less successful.
The existence of the strands which make up AO4 leads to 'best-fit marking'. All strands are 
considered before a final mark is decided upon. The most successful students, therefore 
were able to display evidence of a clear understanding of all 3:
the quality of the judgement based on reasoning
the analysis of the provided material
the deployment of knowledge of the historical context to support the application of 
criteria.
In addition, most students were able to provide full and structured responses with very few 
appearing to be rushed or running out of time.
29GCSE History 1HIA 33

30GCSE History 1HIA 33

31GCSE History 1HIA 33

32GCSE History 1HIA 33

33GCSE History 1HIA 33

This student reviews the alternative views presented in the 
interpretations impressively and comes to a substantiated conclusion. 
Good contextual knowledge is used to support the analysis and there 
is a clear line of reasoning throughout. Level 4 has been met for all 
three strands: judgement, analysis and contextual knowledge. They 
therefore achieved a mark in Level 4.
Students who examine precise details from the interpretations and 
then use their own knowledge to support these points are more likely 
to gain the higher levels.
34GCSE History 1HIA 33

35GCSE History 1HIA 33

36GCSE History 1HIA 33

37GCSE History 1HIA 33

This student uses their own knowledge effectively to answer the 
question and Level 4 is awarded for this strand. There is some analysis 
of the interpretations, but this is not a strength of the answer and this 
strand is awarded Level 2. There is an explained evaluation and some 
justification for the overall judgement which puts this strand in Level 3. 
Best-fit puts this answer into mid Level 3.
Successful students do not just repeat the content of the 2 
interpretations. They evaluate the points made in Interpretation 2 
using their contextual knowledge and the content of Interpretation 1.
38GCSE History 1HIA 33

Paper Summary
Examiners commented that there were a number of impressive answers where students 
seemed well-prepared and demonstrated excellent knowledge being deployed to support 
thoughtful analysis and evaluation.
The following points should be noted:
Students need to come up with an inference rather than paraphrasing the source in 
question 1.
Students need to recognise the specific focus of the question so that the information 
being offered is shaped to meet the demands of the question rather than simply 
describing a situation or including irrelevant material.
Students should appreciate the difference between sources and interpretations and be 
aware that interpretations are constructed by historians in order to offer their view of 
events.
In all parts of question 3, it is helpful to be explicit about the source or interpretation being 
discussed.
Spelling, punctuation and grammar were broadly accurate and many answers used specialist 
terms with confidence but a poor standard of handwriting made a number of answers 
difficult to mark and exacerbated the difficulty in understanding a badly-expressed answer.
The SPaGST marks may be affected if there are weaknesses in these areas:
Appropriate use of capital letters.
Correct use of apostrophes.
Weak grammar ('would of', ‘based off of’) and casual language, which is not appropriate in 
an examination.
Paragraphs: failure to structure answers in paragraphs not only affects the SPaGST mark, 
but may also make it difficult for the examiner to identify whether three different aspects 
have been covered in question 2, or how well analysis and evaluation is developed in 
question 3.
If extra paper is taken, students should state clearly in the answer space for the question that 
it has been continued and where the rest of the answer had been written; this should be on 
an additional sheet rather than elsewhere in the paper and should be clearly labelled. 
However, in many cases where additional paper had been taken, the marks had already been 
attained within the space provided rather than on the extra paper and students should be 
discouraged from assuming that lengthy answers will automatically score highly. Indeed, 
students taking extra paper often ran out of time on the final, high mark question and 
therefore disadvantaged themselves.
39GCSE History 1HIA 33

Spelling, punctuation and grammar were assessed on 3(d) and the most impressive aspect of 
this strand was the use of specialist terms which perhaps reflects the detailed understanding 
many students had of this depth study.
40GCSE History 1HIA 33

Grade boundaries
Grade boundaries for this, and all other papers, can be found on the website on this link:
https://qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/support-topics/results-certification/grade-
boundaries.html
41GCSE History 1HIA 33

Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828 
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL.