

 
Mark Scheme (Results) 
 
Summer 2022 
 
Pearson Edexcel GCSE 
In History (1HIA) 
Paper 3: Modern depth study  
 
Option 33: The USA, 1954–75: conflict at 
home and abroad  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications 
 
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body. We provide a 
wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and specific programmes for 
employers.   For   further   information   visit   our   qualifications   websites   at www.edexcel.com or 
www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at 
www.edexcel.com/contactus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere 
 
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone progress in 
their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they 
are  in  the  world.  We’ve  been  involved  in  education  for  over  150  years,  and  by  working  across  70 
countries,  in  100  languages,  we  have  built  an  international  reputation  for  our  commitment  to  high 
standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can 
help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summer 2022 
Question Paper Log Number P68717A 
Publications Code 1HIA_33_2022_MS 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Ltd 2022 
 
 
  

 
General Marking Guidance 
  
  
• All candidates must receive the same treatment.  Examiners must 
mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the 
last. 
• Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be 
rewarded  for  what  they have  shown  they  can  do  rather  than 
penalised for omissions. 
• Examiners   should  mark   according  to  the  mark  scheme   not 
according to their perception of where the grade boundaries may 
lie. 
• There is no ceiling on achievement. All marks on the mark scheme 
should be used appropriately. 
• All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. 
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the 
answer  matches  the  mark  scheme.  Examiners  should  also  be 
prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not 
worthy of credit according to the mark scheme. 
• Where  some  judgement  is  required,  mark  schemes  will  provide 
the principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification 
may be limited. 
• When  examiners  are  in  doubt  regarding  the  application  of  the 
mark scheme to a candidate’s response, the team leader must be 
consulted. 
• Crossed  out  work  should  be  marked  UNLESS  the  candidate  has 
replaced it with an alternative response. 
 
  

 
How to award marks when level descriptions are used 
1. Finding the right level 
The first stage is to decide which level the answer should be placed in. To do this, use a ‘best-fit’ approach, 
deciding which level most closely describes the quality of the answer. Answers can display characteristics 
from more than one level, and where this happens markers must use the guidance below and their 
professional judgement to decide which level is most appropriate. 
For example, one stronger passage at L4 would not by itself merit a L4 mark, but it might be evidence to 
support a high L3 mark, unless there are substantial weaknesses in other areas. Similarly, an answer that fits 
best in L3 but which has some characteristics of L2 might be placed at the bottom of L3. An answer 
displaying some characteristics of L3 and some of L1 might be placed in L2. 
 
2. Finding a mark within a level 
After a level has been decided on, the next stage is to decide on the mark within the level. The instructions 
below tell you how to reward responses within a level. However, where a level has specific guidance about 
how to place an answer within a level, always follow that guidance. 
Levels containing two marks only 
Start with the presumption that the work will be at the top of the level. Move down to the lower 
mark if the work only just meets the requirements of the level. 
Levels containing three or more marks 
Markers should be prepared to use the full range of marks available in a level and not restrict marks to 
the middle. Markers should start at the middle of the level (or the upper-middle mark if there is an even 
number of marks) and then move the mark up or down to find the best mark. To do this, they should 
take into account how far the answer meets the requirements of the level: 
• If it meets the requirements fully, markers should be prepared to award full marks within the level. 
The top mark in the level is used for answers that are as good as can realistically be expected within 
that level 
• If it only barely meets the requirements of the level, markers should consider awarding marks at 
the bottom of the level. The bottom mark in the level is used for answers that are the weakest that 
can be expected within that level 
• The middle marks of the level are used for answers that have a reasonable match to the descriptor. 
This  might  represent  a balance  between  some  characteristics  of the  level that  are  fully  met  and 
others that are only barely met. 
Indicative content 
Examiners are reminded that indicative content is provided as an illustration to markers of some of the 
material that may be offered by students. It does not show required content and alternatives should be 
credited where valid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Modern depth study 33: The USA, 1954-75: conflict at home and abroad 
 
Question 
 
1 
Give two things you can infer from Source A about Search and Destroy 
missions in Vietnam. 
Target: Source analysis (making inferences). 
AO3: 4 marks. 
Marking instructions 
Award 1 mark for each valid inference up to a maximum of two inferences. The second mark for each example 
should be awarded for supporting detail selected from the source. 
e.g. 
• Search and Destroy missions were frightening for soldiers (1). ‘You didn’t know if your next step would be your last’ 
(1).  
• Search and Destroy missions were frustrating for American soldiers (1). A lot of the time was spent searching for the 
Vietcong’s hiding places (1). 
• Search and Destroy missions sometimes went out of control (1). Soldiers burned down houses when they weren’t 
supposed to (1). 
 
Accept other appropriate alternatives. 
 
 
 
  

 
  
Question  
2 
Explain why opposition in the USA to the Vietnam War increased in the years 
1964-73. 
You may use the following in your answer: 
• My Lai Massacre, 1968 
• Kent State University, 1970 
You must also use information of your own. 
Target: Analysis of second order concepts: causation [AO2]; 
Knowledge and understanding of features and characteristics [AO1]. 
AO2: 6 marks. 
AO1: 6 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–3 
• A simple or generalised answer is given, lacking development and organisation. [AO2]  
• Limited knowledge and understanding of the topic is shown. [AO1] 
2 4–6 
• An explanation is given, showing limited analysis and with implicit or unsustained links 
to the conceptual focus of the question. It shows some development and organisation of 
material, but a line of reasoning is not sustained. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing some knowledge and 
understanding of the period. [AO1] 
Maximum 5 marks for Level 2 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by the stimulus 
points. 
3 7–9 
• An explanation is given, showing some analysis, which is mainly directed at the 
conceptual focus of the question. It shows a line of reasoning that is generally sustained, 
although some passages may lack coherence and organisation. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing good knowledge and 
understanding of the required features or characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
Maximum 8 marks for Level 3 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by the stimulus 
points. 
4 10–12 
• An analytical explanation is given which is directed consistently at the conceptual focus 
of the question, showing a line of reasoning that is coherent, sustained and logically 
structured. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is precisely selected to address the question directly, 
showing wide-ranging knowledge and understanding of the required features or 
characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
No access to Level 4 for answers which do not go beyond aspects prompted by the stimulus 
points. 

 
 
  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Performance in AO1 and AO2 is interdependent. An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be awarded 
more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should note that the 
expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.  
The middle mark in each level may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities outlined in 
the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this does not imply that 
these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. 
Relevant points may include: 
• Many people in America were shocked by what was happening in their name. There was a strong reaction 
among the public to news of the My Lai massacre and the subsequent cover-up. 
• The American public became demoralised. My Lai showed that the US was not winning the war of hearts and 
mind in Vietnam. 
• The shock of seeing American students killed at Kent State University increased opposition to the Vietnam 
War.  
• Nixon’s decision to expand the war into Cambodia was unpopular and led to the dramatic growth of the 
student protest movement across America.   
• Opposition to the war increased as a reaction against the draft system because minorities and young working-
class men were more at risk of being called up to fight.  
• The American public started to oppose the war because they were watching distressing images of the fighting 
on television and the media reported the scale of the human loss.  
 

 
Question  
3 (a) 
How useful are Sources B and C for an enquiry into the methods used by the Black 
Panther movement? 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of source utility. 
AO3: 8 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple judgement on utility is given, and supported by undeveloped comment on 
the content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Simple comprehension of the 
source material is shown by the extraction or paraphrase of some content. Limited 
contextual knowledge is deployed with links to the sources. 
2 3–5 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, using valid criteria. 
Judgements are supported by developed comment related to the content of the 
sources and/or their provenance
1
. Comprehension and some analysis of the sources 
is shown by the selection and use of material to support comments on their utility. 
Contextual knowledge is used directly to support comments on the usefulness of the 
content of the sources and/or their provenance. 
3 6–8 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, applying valid criteria 
with developed reasoning which takes into account how the provenance
1
 affects the 
usefulness of the source content. The sources are analysed to support reasoning 
about their utility. Contextual knowledge is used in the process of interpreting the 
sources and applying criteria for judgements on their utility.  
Notes 
1. Provenance = nature, origin, purpose. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the sources. 
No credit may be given for generic comments on provenance which are not used to evaluate source content. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities outlined in 
the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this does not imply that 
these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The grouping of points below does not 
imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their answers.  
Source B  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The source shows that a key method used by the Black Panthers was using armed patrols to confront and 
monitor the police.  
• The source suggests the armed patrols were used as a method to increase their visibility in the community.  
• The source indicates that the Panthers’ methods could potentially involve direct action against the police.  
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to ascribe 
usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• Bobby Seale was one of the men who founded the Black Panther Party, so he gives a direct insight into the 
methods used and he attempts to justify the use of those methods. 
• The interview was recorded two decades after the events, so Seale could have been open about their methods 
without fear of arrest, or of giving away information to the police. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the usefulness of 
information. Relevant points may include: 

 
  
• One of the main aims of the Black Panther Party, as listed in its Ten Point Programme, was ‘an immediate end 
to police brutality’ and armed patrols were used to achieve this. 
• The Party was founded in California and soon spread to 25 other cities where similar police patrols were 
carried out. 
Source C  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The source shows that the free breakfasts programme was part of a wider campaign to improve children’s 
education. 
• The source suggests that the Black Panther Party had ambitions to create a much wider network of community 
support around the country. 
• The source shows that the movement wanted to use its community programmes to prevent hunger in black 
communities. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to ascribe 
usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The fact that the newspaper was widely sold suggests that there was support from black communities for the 
Party and its methods.  
• It is likely that the official newspaper of the Black Panther Party was trying to create a positive image of the 
movement. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the usefulness of 
information. Relevant points may include: 
• The Black Panther Party supported young people by providing education courses and controlling dangerous 
traffic near schools. 
• The breakfast programme was only one of the methods used to provide social support to black people in the 
ghettos. Other methods included trying to prevent disease and handing out clothes. 

 
Question  
3 (b) 
Study Interpretations 1 and 2. They give different views about the methods used by the 
Black Panther movement. What is the main difference between these views? Explain your 
answer, using details from both interpretations.  
Target: Analysis of interpretations (how they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• Limited analysis of the interpretations is shown by the extraction or paraphrase of 
some content, but differences of surface detail only are given, or a difference of view is 
asserted without direct support. 
2 3–4 
 
• The interpretations are analysed and a key difference of view is identified and 
supported from them. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities outlined in 
the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive and other relevant material not suggested 
below must also be credited. 
• A main difference is that Interpretation 1 suggests that the methods used by the Black Panthers were 
focused on confronting the police to prevent acts of brutality. Interpretation 2, on the other hand, 
emphasises the social work carried out by the movement in community projects.  
  

 
Question  
3 (c) 
Suggest one reason why Interpretations 1 and 2 give different views about the  methods 
used by the Black Panther movement. You may use Sources B and C to help explain your 
answer.  
Target: Analysis of interpretations (why they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple valid explanation is offered but displaying only limited analysis. Support for the 
explanation is based on simple undeveloped comment or on the selection of details 
from the provided material or own knowledge, with only implied linkage to the 
explanation. 
2 3–4 
• An explanation of a reason for difference is given, analysing the interpretations. The 
explanation is substantiated effectively.  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities outlined in 
the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive. The examples below show different 
approaches to explaining difference, any one of which may be valid. Other valid material must be credited. 
• The interpretations may differ because they have given weight to different sources. For example Source B, 
which shows that the Panthers gave a clear warning that they would stand up to police brutality, provides 
some support for Interpretation 1 which stresses the actions carried out by armed patrols when confronting 
the police; while Source C, which shows how the free breakfast programmes worked, provides some support 
for Interpretation 2 which emphasises the support provided to poor black children. 
• The interpretations may differ because they have a different emphasis. Interpretation 1 seeks to create an 
impression of a violent organisation while Interpretation 2 attempts to create a more positive impression of 
an organisation determined to improve people’s lives. 
• They may differ because the authors take different viewpoints – Interpretation 1 deals narrowly with the 
short-term methods used to stop police brutality; Interpretation 2 takes a wider view by considering a range 
of methods carried out to create long-term social improvements. 
 
  

 
  
Question  
3 (d) 
How far do you agree with Interpretation 2 about the methods used by the Black 
Panther movement? Explain your answer, using both interpretations, and your 
knowledge of the historical context.  
Target: Analysis and evaluation of interpretations. 
AO4: 16 marks. 
Spelling, punctuation, grammar and the use of specialist terminology (SPaG): 
up to 4 additional marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–4 
• Answer offers simple valid comment to agree with or counter the interpretation. 
Limited analysis of one interpretation is shown by selection and inclusion of some 
detail in the form of simple paraphrase or direct quotation. Generalised 
contextual knowledge is included and linked to the evaluation. 
2 5–8 
• Answer offers valid evaluative comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Some analysis is shown in selecting and including details from both 
interpretations to support this comment. Some relevant contextual knowledge is 
included and linked to the evaluation. An overall judgement is given but its 
justification is insecure or undeveloped and a line of reasoning is not sustained. 
3 9–12 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation, agreeing or disagreeing with the 
interpretation. Good analysis of the interpretations is shown indicating difference 
of view and deploying this to support the evaluation. Relevant contextual 
knowledge is used directly to support the evaluation. An overall judgement is 
given with some justification and a line of reasoning is generally sustained. 
4 13–16 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation reviewing the alternative views in 
coming to a substantiated judgement. Precise analysis of the interpretations is 
shown, indicating how the differences of view are conveyed and deploying this 
material to support the evaluation. Relevant contextual knowledge is precisely 
selected to support the evaluation. An overall judgment is justified and the line of 
reasoning is coherent, sustained and logically structured. 
Marks for SPaG 
Performance Mark Descriptor 
 0 
• The learner writes nothing. 
• The learner’s response does not relate to the question. 
• The learner’s achievement in SPaG does not reach the threshold performance 
level, e.g. errors in spelling, punctuation and grammar severely hinder meaning. 
Threshold 1 
• Learners spell and punctuate with reasonable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with some control of meaning and any errors do 
not significantly hinder meaning overall.  
• Learners use a limited range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
Intermediate 2–3 
• Learners spell and punctuate with considerable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with general control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a good range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
High 4 
• Learners spell and punctuate with consistent accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with effective control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a wide range of specialist terms as appropriate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828  
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom 
 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the interpretations. 
In all levels, the second sentence relates to analysis and while the rest relate to evaluation. The following rules 
will apply: 
• In Level 1, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis without evidence of evaluation 
should be awarded 1 mark. 
• In other levels, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis (but that also fully meet the 
descriptors for evaluation of the level below) should be awarded no more than the bottom mark in the level. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities outlined in 
the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this does not imply that 
these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The grouping of points below does not 
imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their answers.  
The interpretation to be evaluated suggests that the main methods used by the Black Panther movement 
involved meeting the basic social needs of black communities. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which support the claim made in the 
interpretation may include: 
• Interpretation 2 shows the Black Panther movement tried to improve social conditions in black communities 
by doing things like improving healthcare provision. 
• Interpretation 2 show that the Black Panther movement also tried to educate members of the black 
community about their history.  
• The Panthers’ Ten Point Programme focused on a wide range of social improvements, such as education, 
employment and housing. 
• The Free Breakfast Programme was rolled out to several cities across the USA and by 1969 the Black 
Panthers were feeding 10,000 children every day. 
• The Black Panther movement was active in promoting healthier black communities by providing free 
medical tests and vaccinations.  
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which counter the view may include:  
• Interpretation 1 suggests that the most visible method used by the Black Panthers was to prevent police 
brutality through armed patrols. 
• Interpretation 1 states that members of the movement were prepared to use confrontational methods and 
were involved in shootouts with the police.  
• Black Panther groups ambushed police patrols, which led to the deaths of both their own members and 
police officers. 
• The Black Panthers made negative comments about the police in their magazines and newsletters.  
• The Black Panthers confronted criminal gangs, tortured suspected police informants and sometimes carried 
out violent robberies to fund their activities.  