

Examiners’ Report
June 2023
GCSE History 1HI0 33

Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications come from Pearson, the UK's largest awarding body. We
provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and
specific programmes for employers. For further information visit our qualifications websites
at www.edexcel.com or www.btec.co.uk.
Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at
www.edexcel.com/contactus.
Giving you insight to inform next steps
ResultsPlus is Pearson's free online service giving instant and detailed analysis of your
students' exam results.
See students' scores for every exam question.
Understand how your students' performance compares with class and national averages.
Identify potential topics, skills and types of question where students may need to develop
their learning further.
For more information on ResultsPlus, or to log in, visit www.edexcel.com/resultsplus. Your
exams officer will be able to set up your ResultsPlus account in minutes via Edexcel Online.
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone
progress in their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of
people, wherever they are in the world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150 years,
and by working across 70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an international
reputation for our commitment to high standards and raising achievement through
innovation in education. Find out more about how we can help you and your students at:
www.pearson.com/uk.
June 2023
Publications Code 1HI0_33_2306_ER
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Ltd 2023
2GCSE History 1HI0 33

Introduction
Examiners were pleased to see that candidates were very well prepared for this paper. They
were comfortable in dealing with a range of political, economic and social aspects of the
period. Candidates were well-prepared for the question styles and there was clear
understanding of the demands of all questions, and they responded particularly well to the
causation focus in Question 2.
The answer space provided is intended to be sufficient for the question to be answered in full
and although some students did write on extra sheets they were not always as successful as
those who produced more concise answers. Where additional space is needed, it is
important that students clearly state that the answer is continued on paper.
Questions on this paper cover all the Assessment Objectives but over half of the available
marks are for question 3, which focuses on sources and interpretations. These questions
form a coherent package leading to a final question in which students, having explored the
utility of the provided sources, analysed the different views presented in the interpretations
and the reasons for those differences, and are then invited to judge the extent to which they
agree with one of the interpretations. It is therefore important that students appreciate the
differ  ence between sources and interpretations, and the focus of different parts of
Question 3.
The focus in 3(c) is on why the interpretations might differ and the specific areas of weakness
explained below should be read carefully. It is not possible to provide effectively
substantiated reasons why the interpretations are different based on such things as where
and when the interpretations were published although a small number of students did
attempt to do so without success – (see specific information about 3c below).
Question 3 (d) carries the highest number of marks on the paper. Successful students will
have already seen how the views in the interpretations are different, why this might be the
case and, in completing 3(a) have understood that there is likely to be evidence in support of
both interpretations. They are now asked how far they agree with one of the interpretations.
The strongest answers to 3(d), therefore, focused clearly on the interpretations themselves,
reviewing the alternative views and coming to a substantiated judgement. Students who
focused exclusively on the view provided in Interpretation 2 and used this as a basis for an
essay based on their own knowledge were less successful than those who considered the
alternative views from both interpretations. There is no expectation that both interpretations
are dealt with in equal depth, but both should be examined explicitly. The use of contextual
knowledge is an important element in this evaluation, but it must be precisely selected to
support the evaluation and not just used to display knowledge of aspects of the topic which
the student has revised but are not relevant to the enquiry. In addition, some of the strongest
answers were able to show how the differences of view in the two interpretations were
conveyed in reaching their overall judgements.
3GCSE History 1HI0 33

Examiners reported some impressive answers to 3(d) and many students were able to
engage confidently with the interpretations, taking a range of approaches. However, this
question was accessible to all students and even those who did not score highly understood
the need to offer evaluative responses leading to an overall conclusion. Only a few students
were unable to identify the view being offered by the interpretations, so the majority were
able to construct a response in relation to these views. Students rarely seemed rushed and
full answers were generally provided showing that timing wasn’t generally an issue on this
paper.
4GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 1
This question requires students to make two inferences from a source and it is often
regarded as an ‘easy’ question. However, students need to be sure that the inferences they
make are valid inferences in relation to the question focus and not just paraphrases of the
content of the source.
The focus of the question was about the Strategic Hamlet Program. There were two marks
available for each valid inference – one for the inference itself and one for the supporting
information. Most students seemed to understand how to make an inference, and most used
the content of the source to provide support for the inference. Such students tended to
make inferences about the Strategic Hamlet Program being a defensive measure, which
could be referenced by, ‘there were concentric lines of defence around the hamlet and the
main residential areas were inside the lines of defence.’ Some students just repeated the
content of the source, without making an inference, or simply reworded the source. No
marks were available for this approach. A minority of students wrote inferences which were
not about the Strategic Hamlet Program but were about the general conflict in Vietnam. No
marks were available for this approach. Another small minority of students made inferences
which were from their own knowledge rather than from the source.
5GCSE History 1HI0 33

The first inference is comprehension and is therefore not valid. The
second inference is valid, but the support is not. This response gained
1 mark.
Students should ensure the inference is about the specific focus of the
question and not just an inference based on the content of the source
more generally.
6GCSE History 1HI0 33

This student has made two inferences about the Strategic Hamlet
Program supported by direct reference to the source, so gains full
marks.
Students should ensure the inference is not just a quote/ paraphrase
from the source.
7GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 2
This year, candidates responded in a mainly analytical way to this question. They understood
the focus of the question and the need to target causation, rather than description. In
Question 2, the focus will always be on causation, but the question does not require a
judgement to be made or for the answer to prioritise or show interaction of factors and no
marks were available to reward this evaluation, however strongly argued. Instead, the most
successful students showed a consistent analytical focus throughout their answers, and
many were able to access Level 4 by doing so.
In Question 2, the stimulus points in the question will often be useful reminders to students
of specific areas of content which they can write about. Students do not need to use these
stimulus points but there is an expectation that there will be some depth of knowledge,
shown by three discrete aspects of content being covered, although this does not mean
students need to identify three different causes or events.
A small number of answers remained at Level 3, despite excellent contextual knowledge,
because they missed the focus of the question, in this case the reasons for the USA’s
involvement in the peace negotiations. The mark scheme’s bullet point for Assessment
Objective 2 (analysis) at Level 4 expects an analytical explanation, directed consistently at the
conceptual focus of the question. Students who responded to the topic rather than the key
conceptual focus of why the USA were involved in the peace negotiations, were unlikely to
achieve high marks. Those who did reach Level 4 realised that the topic provides the context
but that there is a specific focus, which the analysis should address.
Many students performed well on this question and the majority of students were able to go
beyond the stimulus points, with reference to three aspects of content, and relate these to
the question. It was noteworthy that even students with more limited knowledge of the
content were often able to provide a clear structure in their answers, if not a clear analytical
focus. The stimulus points are provided to help students to link the question they have been
asked to with the material they have studied and to provide a prompt to the analysis.
The majority of students were confident in discussing how unrest within the USA at the
continuation of the war was a reason for the USA being involved in peace negotiations. Many
students also discussed the significance of Nixon’s election promises and the successful use
by the Vietcong of the Ho Chi Minh trail. Some students also discussed the impact of the
expense of the war for the USA. Very few students chose to write about why the war began
or the early stages of American involvement in the war. On the whole, this question was very
well answered.
8GCSE History 1HI0 33

At Level 2, students often described American policy or the Ho Chi Minh trail which left links
to the question implicit, which fits Level 2 for the AO2 focus on analysis. At Level 3 students
were mainly focused on the conceptual focus of the question but sometimes lacked the
wide-ranging knowledge required at Level 4. At Level 4 there were many sustained analytical
responses supported by well-chosen examples which displayed clear understanding of the
precise question, and these were often rewarded with full marks.
9GCSE History 1HI0 33

10GCSE History 1HI0 33

11GCSE History 1HI0 33

The student has covered three areas of content (Nixon, My Lai and the
Ho Chi Minh trail) and has, therefore, satisfied the requirements for
higher marks in Assessment Objective 1 to go beyond the stimulus
points and to show wide-ranging knowledge. The quality of analysis
meets the demands of the mark scheme for Level 4 at Assessment
Objective 2. Although this student has not provided a conclusion, Level
4 has been reached by the focus on the question which is evident in
every paragraph. This response achieved a mark at the top of Level 4.
Keep the analysis linked to the question all the way through the
answer and make sure that detail is being used to support the analysis,
rather than being provided simply as information.
12GCSE History 1HI0 33

This brief response achieves a mark in Level 2. An explanation is given
showing limited analysis with some links to the conceptual focus of the
question. It achieves Level 2 for Assessment Objective 2. However, for
Assessment Objective 1 it shows very limited knowledge and
understanding, therefore Level 1.
Responses must cover 3 aspects of content in order to achieve a mark
above 8.
13GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 3 (a)
All of the sub-questions in Section B relate to either the two interpretations, Sources B and C,
or both the sources and interpretations. Question 3 (a) targets the ability to analyse and
evaluate source utility and, in doing so, introduces the enquiry which will be dealt with in
further detail in questions 3(b), 3(c) and 3(d).
In Question 3 (a) students are expected to evaluate the usefulness of the content, taking
account of the provenance of the sources and applying contextual knowledge in making
judgements about the utility of the sources as evidence for the specific enquiry, in this case
the Freedom Summer. These strands are linked and should be dealt with together, rather
than in isolation. There is no need to compare the two sources and, indeed, only a handful of
students did attempt to do this.
Students found the sources accessible and were confident in showing that the content of the
sources was relevant for the enquiry and therefore useful. They could also make a number of
points about the significance of the provenance for the usefulness of the content, although
sometimes this consisted of simple statements rather than a developed explanation. When
considering provenance, generic comments about a source being biased (with no
explanation of how that bias could be detected or why it occurred), or about the source being
reliable because it came from the time under investigation, could be made without any
reference to the individual source and therefore remained at Level 1. This type of generic
assumption was seen when some answers assumed that the authors of the sources would
be biased or that the accuracy of both sources was high as they were written by people who
were there at the time.
At Level 2, developed comments were made about the content of the sources, for example,
the fact that in Source B, the Freedom Summer had a positive impact on the lives of black
Americans, and in Source C the Freedom Summer saw increased harassment and attacks on
black Americans. There were also good comments made about the provenance of the
sources – that Source B being an interview in which Gandy is commenting with hindsight,
might emphasise the importance of the Freedom Summer as vital to his development as an
activist.
14GCSE History 1HI0 33

Some very good answers could not access the higher marks because they did not include
contextual knowledge. Contextual knowledge is mentioned at every level of the mark scheme
and failure to include it limited a number of otherwise good answers. Students should
recognise that it is not enough to repeat a detail from the source and assert that this can be
confirmed from the student’s own knowledge or to give generalised comments such as ‘I
know that black Americans were attacked’ – some additional detail is needed as a
demonstration of that own knowledge. Contextual knowledge should be relevant to the
enquiry and used to assess the source, for example, to add detail about something
mentioned in the source, to add weight to an aspect of the provenance, to place the source
in a broader context, or to assess whether the source gave an accurate view or showed a
typical situation.
At Level 3, comments need to consider the effect of an aspect of the provenance on the
usefulness of the source content, and contextual knowledge should be integrated into the
process of reaching a judgement, not simply provided as information.
In this question, the focus should be on assessing the usefulness of what is in the source
rather than listing details which are not mentioned. Since the question asks students to
evaluate the usefulness of a source, it can be valid to note the limitations of a source, but
these points need to be used in an overall evaluation of the usefulness of the source; an
answer which focuses on ‘missing’ information without weighing the positive aspects of the
source, is unlikely to score highly. Sources should not be dismissed because they do not
cover every detail that might be helpful in an investigation and students should recognise
that unreliable sources can be very useful. If the answer identifies omissions from the source
as limitations on its usefulness, this should be linked to a consideration of the provenance,
showing whether this is the result of lack of knowledge or deliberate omission.
The question asks ‘how useful’ the sources are, so a judgement should be made on the
usefulness of the source’s evidence for the specific enquiry. Good answers made clear the
criteria being used to assess the usefulness for the enquiry of the sources, weighing the
value of the content in the light of the provenance and the student’s own knowledge. Various
criteria could be used, for example accuracy of detail, reliability, the relevance of the source,
the way it could be used by the historian, how representative the source is etc. and good
students recognised that a source which is regarded as unreliable can be extremely useful to
the historian.
Although a judgement should be reached on the overall usefulness of each source, there is
no requirement to compare the sources or to use them in combination and no marks are
available for this. Students who focused on comparisons between the sources often failed to
develop their judgement on each source properly; if this approach is used, it is important
that the answer still comes to a judgement on each individual source.
15GCSE History 1HI0 33

Very few answers only considered one source, but it should be noted that every level of the
mark scheme refers to ‘sources’ and therefore answers which do not consider both sources
cannot access high marks.
16GCSE History 1HI0 33

17GCSE History 1HI0 33

The student applies their own knowledge to test the accuracy of
elements of the content of the sources. They also evaluate the
provenance and how this may have an impact on the usefulness of the
content. This answer achieved a level 3 mark.
Comments about the usefulness of a source should take into account
how the provenance affects the usefulness of the source content.
18GCSE History 1HI0 33

19GCSE History 1HI0 33

20GCSE History 1HI0 33

At Level 2 students will make developed comments related to the
content of the sources and/or their provenance. In this case the
student makes valid comments testing the content of the source
against their own knowledge to assess its accuracy. As this response
does not make any comment on the provenance of the sources, level 3
is not being met.
Students using precise knowledge to support points about the specific
aspects of the source will always perform better than those who just
use this question to write about the topic.
21GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 3 (b-c)
In this question, students are asked to identify a difference in the overall view being offered
in the interpretations: these do not necessarily contradict each other but they do provide
alternative views. The answers should identify the key difference but also provide support
from each interpretation to demonstrate that difference. Many answers recognised that the
two interpretations offered different views about the Freedom Summer and could select
detail from the two interpretations to support the explanation of that difference.
It is important for students to remember that the focus of this question is to identify the
differ  ences between the views rather than identifying differences of surface detail as the
latter can only be awarded marks in Level 1. Responses which asserted differences without
support, for example stating that Interpretation 1 emphasises the positives of the Freedom
Summer, whereas Interpretation 2 emphasises negatives, stayed in Level 1.
Level 2 was achieved when the students indicated a clear difference of view and supported it
with detail from the extracts. Many students were able to score full marks.
It is important that students recognise the relationship between questions 3b and 3c. Having
identified that the two interpretations offer different views, students are asked to suggest a
reason why these different views have been reached. They should be able to support their
answer with reference to the interpretations.
The focus in Question 3c is on the process by which the historian produces their
interpretation. Where answers suggested that when carrying out research, the authors had
placed weight on different sources, students could score the full 4 marks by linking details in
the interpretations with details in Sources B and C. However, this should be explained with
references to both the interpretations and the sources rather than simply stating that ‘the
author of Interpretation 1 might have used Source B’.
Alternative explanations also recognise that the historian’s emphasis may affect their
research and conclusions. For example, whether an historian deals only with short term
methods to stop police brutality or methods to create long-term social improvements.
22GCSE History 1HI0 33

Here again, the explanation needs to be supported by the use of the interpretations. In trying
to give an explanation for a reason for the difference between interpretations some students
are still attempting to use the provenance of the interpretations to provide this explanation,
and this is unlikely to provide a valid basis for a response to this question. The full reasons
for this are explained in the Getting Started Guide on pp 43-44. There is also some additional
guidance in the 2019 Examiners’ Report on p.25. As stated in Getting Started: ‘Students should
distinguish between their comments on contemporary sources and on these texts.
Responses based on matters such as the origin or time of production of these secondary
works are unlikely to be valid for this question.’ A significant minority of students tried to
provide explanations for difference on the basis of such factors as the titles of the books,
their origin or date of production. Such approaches did not produce creditworthy responses.
23GCSE History 1HI0 33

24GCSE History 1HI0 33

25GCSE History 1HI0 33

For Question 3b, the student clearly states the main difference of view
between the interpretations and supports this with extracts from the
interpretations and as a result gets full marks.
For question 3c, the student has gained full marks by explaining how
the writers may have different views as they have referred to different
pieces of evidence. They evidence this by referring to the
interpretations and the sources and therefore achieve a mark in Level
2.
In Question 3b, the answer flags the difference between the
interpretations using the word ‘however’. Use of such a word indicates
the candidate is comparing the interpretations.
In Question 3c, candidates need to make a clear link between the
content of the sources and the content of the interpretations to show
how the writer may have given weight to different pieces of evidence.
26GCSE History 1HI0 33

27GCSE History 1HI0 33

In Question 3b, the student has asserted a difference between the
interpretations which gives it a mark in Level 2.
In the answer to Question 3c, the student has suggested that the
Interpretations may have used different evidence and have referred to
sources B and C. However, the link between the sources and the
interpretations is not fully evidenced. The mark therefore stays at the
bottom of Level 2.
For Question 3b, students must support the differences in view they
have identified.
28GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 3 (d)
Question 3 (d) carries the highest number of marks on the paper. Successful students will
have already seen how the views in the interpretations are different, why this might be the
case and, in completing 3(a) have understood that there is likely to be evidence in support of
both interpretations. They are now asked how far they agree with one of the interpretations.
The strongest answers to 3(d), therefore, focused clearly on the interpretations themselves,
reviewing the alternative views and coming to a substantiated judgement. Students need to
recognise that they are not being asked to treat the interpretation as a source and evaluate
its reliability or usefulness but to explain whether they think the historian has offered a valid
view.
There is no expectation that both interpretations are dealt with in equal depth, but both
should be examined explicitly. The use of contextual knowledge is an important element in
this evaluation, but it must be precisely selected to support the evaluation of the
interpretation.
A number of students were able to engage confidently with the interpretations, taking a
range of approaches. However, very few of the strongest answers were able to show how the
differ  ences of view in the two interpretations were conveyed, for example through the use of
language, tone, selection or omission of detail, emphasis created by the structure of the
interpretation, etc.
It is expected that students will reach a judgement when answering this question and the
strongest students developed their evaluation throughout the answer, creating a consistently
argued response. Less successful answers offered points to support the views expressed in
interpretation 2, then used interpretation 1 to challenge those views, before reaching the
view that interpretation 2 was ‘somewhat accurate’ or saying that they ‘partially agreed with
the view' in Interpretation 2. In these answers, there was little sense of evaluation, simply an
explanation of the different views, with the acknowledgement that each had some valid
points. The strongest answers to question 3(d), therefore, focused clearly on the
interpretations themselves, integrating evaluation while reviewing the alternative views and
coming to a substantiated judgement.
The selection of contextual knowledge to support the evaluation was often a strong aspect of
students’ responses with most students showing a good awareness of how to deploy their
knowledge as well as being in possession of an appropriate level of detail. It was pleasing to
note that there were very few responses which focused primarily on providing contextual
knowledge for its own sake and that students showed an awareness of how to use their
knowledge to help them decide on the validity of views selected from the interpretations. A
small but noticeable number of students were unable to apply their own knowledge
effectively. Merely asserting agreement with points in the interpretation by saying ‘from my
own knowledge I know this to be true’ is not sufficient evidence of contextual knowledge.
29GCSE History 1HI0 33

A full range of responses suggest this question was accessible to students of all ability and
full answers were generally provided showing that timing wasn’t generally an issue on this
paper. Students who focused exclusively on the view provided in interpretation 2 and used
this as a basis for an essay based on their own knowledge were less successful.
The existence of the strands which make up AO4 leads to ‘best-fit marking '. All strands are
considered before a final mark is decided upon. The most successful students, therefore,
were able to display evidence of a clear understanding of all 3:
the quality of the judgement based on reasoning
the analysis of the provided material
the deployment of knowledge of the historical context to support the application of
criteria.
In addition, most students were able to provide full and structured responses with very few
appearing to be rushed or running out of time.
30GCSE History 1HI0 33

31GCSE History 1HI0 33

32GCSE History 1HI0 33

33GCSE History 1HI0 33

This student reviews the alternative views presented in the
interpretations impressively and comes to a substantiated conclusion.
Good contextual knowledge is used to support the analysis and there
is a clear line of reasoning throughout. The response also refers to how
the difference of views has been conveyed, when discussing the
exaggeration of the interpretation on page 3. Level 4 has been met for
all three strands: judgement, analysis and contextual knowledge. They
therefore achieved a mark at the top of Level 4.
Students who examine precise details from the interpretations and
then use their own knowledge to support these points are more likely
to gain the higher levels.
34GCSE History 1HI0 33

35GCSE History 1HI0 33

36GCSE History 1HI0 33

37GCSE History 1HI0 33

This student provides an explained evaluation, agreeing and
disagreeing with the interpretation and an overall judgement is given
with some justification. This strand achieved a mark in Level 3. There is
good analysis of the interpretations, and this strand is awarded Level
3. Relevant contextual knowledge is used, also putting this strand in
Level 3. The response achieved a mark towards the top of Level 3.
Answers which are able to precisely analyse the interpretations rather
than just giving the gist of each are more likely to be successful.
38GCSE History 1HI0 33

Paper Summary
Examiners commented that there were a number of impressive answers where students
seemed well-prepared and demonstrated excellent knowledge being deployed to support
thoughtful analysis and evaluation.
Based on the performance on this paper candidates are offered the following advice:
Students need to come up with an inference rather than paraphrasing the source in
question 1.
Students need to recognise the specific focus of the question so that the information
being offered is shaped to meet the demands of the question rather than simply
describing a situation or including irrelevant material. This is particularly important when
considering question 2. Answers need to focus on why, rather than how.
Students should appreciate the difference between sources and interpretations and be
aware that interpretations are constructed by historians in order to offer their view of
events.
In all parts of Question 3, it is helpful to be explicit about the source or interpretation
being discussed.
Spelling, punctuation and grammar were broadly accurate, and many answers used specialist
terms with confidence but a poor standard of handwriting made a number of answers
difficult to mark and exacerbated the difficulty in understanding a badly-expressed answer.
The SPaGST marks may be affected if there are weaknesses in these areas:
Appropriate use of capital letters
Correct use of apostrophes
Weak grammar ('would of', ‘based off of’) and casual language, which is not appropriate in
an examination
If extra paper is taken, students should state clearly in the answer space for the question that
it has been continued and where the rest of the answer had been written; this should be on
an additional sheet rather than elsewhere in the paper and should be clearly labelled.
However, in many cases where additional paper had been taken, the marks had already been
attained within the space provided rather than on the extra paper and students should be
discouraged from assuming that lengthy answers will automatically score highly. Indeed,
students taking extra paper often ran out of time on the final, high mark question and
therefore disadvantaged themselves.
Spelling, punctuation and grammar were assessed on 3(d) and the most impressive aspect of
this strand was the use of specialist terms which perhaps reflects the detailed understanding
many students had of this depth study.
39GCSE History 1HI0 33

Grade boundaries
Grade boundaries for this, and all other papers, can be found on the website on this link:
https://qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/support-topics/results-certification/grade-
boundaries.html
40GCSE History 1HI0 33

Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL.