

 
 
Mark Scheme (Results) 
 
Summer 2023 
 
Pearson Edexcel GCSE 
In History (1HI0) 
Paper 3: Modern depth study  
 
Option 33: The USA, 1954–75: conflict at 
home and abroad  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications 
 
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body. We provide a 
wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and specific programmes for 
employers.   For   further   information   visit   our   qualifications   websites   at www.edexcel.com or 
www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at 
www.edexcel.com/contactus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere 
 
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone progress in 
their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they 
are in the world. We’ve been involved in education  for  over  150  years,  and  by  working  across  70 
countries,  in  100  languages,  we  have  built  an  international  reputation  for  our  commitment  to  high 
standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can 
help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summer 2023 
Question Paper Log Number P72614A 
Publications Code 1HI0_33_2306_MS 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Ltd 2023 
 
  

 
General Marking Guidance 
  
  
• All candidates must receive the same treatment.  Examiners must 
mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the 
last. 
• Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be 
rewarded  for  what  they  have  shown  they  can  do  rather  than 
penalised for omissions. 
• Examiners   should  mark   according  to  the  mark  scheme   not 
according to their perception of where the grade boundaries may 
lie. 
• There is no ceiling on achievement. All marks on the mark scheme 
should be used appropriately. 
• All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. 
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the 
answer  matches  the  mark  scheme.  Examiners  should  also  be 
prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not 
worthy of credit according to the mark scheme. 
• Where  some  judgement  is  required,  mark  schemes  will  provide 
the principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification 
may be limited. 
• When  examiners  are  in  doubt  regarding  the  application  of the 
mark scheme to a candidate’s response, the team leader must be 
consulted. 
• Crossed  out  work  should  be  marked  UNLESS  the  candidate  has 
replaced it with an alternative response. 
 
 
  

 
How to award marks when level descriptions are used 
1. Finding the right level 
The first stage is to decide which level the answer should be placed in. To do this, use a ‘best-fit’ approach, 
deciding which level most closely describes the quality of the answer. Answers can display characteristics 
from more than one level, and where this happens markers must use the guidance below and their 
professional judgement to decide which level is most appropriate. 
For example, one stronger passage at L4 would not by itself merit a L4 mark, but it might be evidence to 
support a high L3 mark, unless there are substantial weaknesses in other areas. Similarly, an answer that fits 
best in L3 but which has some characteristics of L2 might be placed at the bottom of L3. An answer 
displaying some characteristics of L3 and some of L1 might be placed in L2. 
 
2. Finding a mark within a level 
After a level has been decided on, the next stage is to decide on the mark within the level. The instructions 
below tell you how to reward responses within a level. However, where a level has specific guidance about 
how to place an answer within a level, always follow that guidance. 
Levels containing two marks only 
Start with the presumption that the work will be at the top of the level. Move down to the lower 
mark if the work only just meets the requirements of the level. 
Levels containing three or more marks 
Markers should be prepared to use the full range of marks available in a level and not restrict marks to 
the middle. Markers should start at the middle of the level (or the upper-middle mark if there is an even 
number of marks) and then move the mark up or down to find the best mark. To do this, they should 
take into account how far the answer meets the requirements of the level: 
• If it meets the requirements fully, markers should be prepared to award full marks within the level. 
The top mark in the level is used for answers that are as good as can realistically be expected within 
that level 
• If it only barely meets the requirements of the level, markers should consider awarding marks at 
the bottom of the level. The bottom mark in the level is used for answers that are the weakest that 
can be expected within that level 
• The middle marks of the level are used for answers that have a reasonable match to the descriptor. 
This  might  represent  a balance  between  some  characteristics  of the  level that  are  fully  met  and 
others that are only barely met. 
Indicative content 
Examiners are reminded that indicative content is provided as an illustration to markers of some of the 
material that may be offered by students. It does not show required content and alternatives should be 
credited where valid. 
  

 
Modern depth study: The USA, 1954-75: conflict at home and abroad 
 
Question 
 
1 
Give two things you can infer from Source A about the Strategic Hamlet Program in 
Vietnam. 
Target: Source analysis (making inferences). 
AO3: 4 marks. 
Marking instructions 
Award 1 mark for each valid inference up to a maximum of two inferences. The second mark for each 
example should be awarded for supporting detail selected from the source. 
e.g. 
• The Strategic Hamlet Program was seen as a success (1). The Program was to be expanded to cover 
more areas (1).  
• The Program was a defensive measure (1). There were concentric lines of defence around the hamlet 
and the main residential areas were inside the lines of defence (1). 
• The Strategic Hamlet Program could have been used as a method of control (1). The ditch and 
mound would have restricted access into and out of the hamlets (1). 
Accept other appropriate alternatives. 
 
  

 
  
Question  
2 
Explain why the USA was involved in the peace negotiations (1972-73) about the war 
in Vietnam. 
You may use the following in your answer: 
• President Nixon 
• Ho Chi Minh trail 
You must also use information of your own. 
Target: Analysis of second order concepts: causation [AO2]; 
Knowledge and understanding of features and characteristics [AO1]. 
AO2: 6 marks. 
AO1: 6 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–3 
• A simple or generalised answer is given, lacking development and organisation. 
[AO2]  
• Limited knowledge and understanding of the topic is shown. [AO1] 
2 4–6 
• An explanation is given, showing limited analysis and with implicit or unsustained 
links to the conceptual focus of the question. It shows some development and 
organisation of material, but a line of reasoning is not sustained. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing some knowledge and 
understanding of the period. [AO1] 
Maximum 5 marks for Level 2 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by 
the stimulus points. 
3 7–9 
• An explanation is given, showing some analysis, which is mainly directed at the 
conceptual focus of the question. It shows a line of reasoning that is generally 
sustained, although some passages may lack coherence and organisation. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing good knowledge and 
understanding of the required features or characteristics of the period studied. 
[AO1] 
Maximum 8 marks for Level 3 answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by 
the stimulus points. 
4 10–12 
• An analytical explanation is given which is directed consistently at the conceptual 
focus of the question, showing a line of reasoning that is coherent, sustained and 
logically structured. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is precisely selected to address the question 
directly, showing wide-ranging knowledge and understanding of the required 
features or characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
No access to Level 4 for answers which do not go beyond aspects prompted by the 
stimulus points. 

 
 
  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Performance in AO1 and AO2 is interdependent. An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be 
awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should 
note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.  
The middle mark in each level may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. 
Relevant points may include: 
• President Nixon had been elected on a programme which included a promise to work towards the end 
of the war. 
• Nixon’s policy of Vietnamisation aimed to equip South Vietnamese forces to be able to conduct their 
own defence, meaning that US forces would not need to be involved. 
• The US realised that a military end to the war was unlikely because the Vietcong was still being 
supplied along the Ho Chi Minh trail, mitigating the effects of sustained American bombing and 
creating frustration within the USA over the prolonged war. 
• Opposition to the war had escalated within the USA, e.g. following the media coverage of both the 
trial of Lieutenant Calley and the deaths at the student protest at Kent State University, 1970. 
• The war was very expensive and the USA had little to show for the investment of money and troops. 
• Changing international relations, such as détente and a rapprochement with China, meant that the 
USA wanted to withdraw from the war. 

 
Question  
3 (a) 
How useful are Sources B and C for an enquiry into the Freedom Summer (1964)? 
Explain your answer, using Sources B and C and your knowledge of the historical 
context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of source utility. 
AO3: 8 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple judgement on utility is given, and supported by undeveloped 
comment on the content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Simple 
comprehension of the source material is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content. Limited contextual knowledge is deployed with links to the 
sources. 
2 3–5 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, using valid 
criteria. Judgements are supported by developed comment related to the 
content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Comprehension and some 
analysis of the sources is shown by the selection and use of material to support 
comments on their utility. Contextual knowledge is used directly to support 
comments on the usefulness of the content of the sources and/or their 
provenance. 
3 6–8 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, applying valid 
criteria with developed reasoning which takes into account how the 
provenance
1
 affects the usefulness of the source content. The sources are 
analysed to support reasoning about their utility. Contextual knowledge is used 
in the process of interpreting the sources and applying criteria for judgements 
on their utility.  
Notes 
1. Provenance = nature, origin, purpose. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the sources. 
No credit may be given for generic comments on provenance which are not used to evaluate source 
content. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The grouping 
of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their answers.  
Source B  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• Source B shows that some black Americans felt that the Freedom Summer had a positive impact on 
their situation and claimed it was a turning point in their struggle for civil rights. 
• Source B claims that the Freedom Summer changed attitudes and made black Americans more willing 
to organise campaigns for their civil rights. 
• The source suggests that some black Americans appreciated the work of white volunteers. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The source is from someone who attended a Freedom School and benefited from the activities of the 
Freedom Summer, which could explain why he has a positive view of the events. 

 
  
• Gandy is commenting with hindsight and sees the Freedom Summer as a key point in his own 
development as an activist, so he may be influenced by that to emphasise the significance of the 
Freedom Summer.  
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• Educational provision for black American children in the South was poor, so Freedom Schools were 
set up and run by volunteers during the summer of 1964 to help children become better educated 
and be in a position to gain qualifications. 
• The Freedom Summer focused especially on southern states such as Mississippi, where few black 
Americans were registered to vote.    
• White and black activists had worked together in sit-ins in 1960 and as Freedom Riders in 1961 and 
SNCC knew that the involvement of white activists generated more publicity, so a deliberate policy 
was adopted to involve middle-class white students in the summer voter registration campaign. 
• Source C  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The source suggests that church buildings and church leaders were targeted for attack, as they were 
involved in Freedom Schools and voter registration rallies. 
• The source highlights the role of the police in the harassment of civil rights activists. 
• Source C illustrates the range of methods used to intimidate civil rights activists and to prevent 
media coverage of events.  
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The organisers of the Mississippi Freedom Summer would have been in contact with all the local 
workers and therefore could receive accurate reports of harassment. 
• The authors of the document aimed to record the nature and extent of the harassment faced by civil 
rights workers, to draw attention to the problem of black American voter registration in Mississippi, 
so it is possible that some of the incidents have been portrayed as more serious than they were. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• The murder of three civil rights workers in Mississippi during this summer gained a great deal of 
national publicity because two of them were white activists. 
• Churches played an important role in the civil rights movement, for example the role of the SLCC and 
the leadership of Martin Luther King. 
 

 
Question  
3 (b) Study Interpretations 1 and 2. They give different views about the Freedom 
Summer (1964). What is the main difference between these views? Explain your 
answer, using details from both interpretations. 
 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (how they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• Limited analysis of the interpretations is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content, but differences of surface detail only are given, or a difference 
of view is asserted without direct support. 
2 3–4 
 
• The interpretations are analysed and a key difference of view is identified and 
supported from them. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive and other relevant 
material not suggested below must also be credited. 
• A main difference is that Interpretation 1 suggests the Freedom Summer was a positive experience, 
stressing the number of schools set up and the help given to a large amount of people who wanted 
to vote.  Interpretation 2, on the other hand, highlights the negative aspects of the Freedom 
Summer, listing the physical attacks on the activists and the limited number of black Americans 
who became registered to vote.  
  

 
Question  
3 (c) 
Suggest one reason why Interpretations 1 and 2 give different views about the 
Freedom Summer (1964). You may use Sources B and C to help explain your 
answer. 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (why they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple valid explanation is offered but displaying only limited analysis. Support 
for the explanation is based on simple undeveloped comment or on the selection 
of details from the provided material or own knowledge, with only implied 
linkage to the explanation. 
2 3–4 
• An explanation of a reason for difference is given, analysing the interpretations. 
The explanation is substantiated effectively.  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive. The examples below 
show different approaches to explaining difference, any one of which may be valid. Other valid material 
must be credited. 
• The interpretations may differ because they have given weight to different sources. For example, 
Source B suggests the Freedom Summer had a significant impact on the lives of those involved, 
which provides support for Interpretation 1’s claim that the Freedom Schools and voter registration 
programme were successful. Source C provides details of the attacks and intimidation used against 
the activists, which provides some support for Interpretation 2’s suggestion that there were attacks 
on the activists and a limited achievement in the increase in voter registration. 
• The interpretations may differ because they are considering different aspects of the Freedom 
Summer. Interpretation 1 is emphasising what was done in practical terms, for example schools and 
voter registration campaigns, whereas Interpretation 2 is emphasising negative reactions, such as 
attacks on civil rights workers by Freedom Summer opponents and the questioning of Freedom 
Summer by black American activists of the tactics used. 
• They may differ because the authors have a different emphasis – Interpretation 1 is from the point 
of view that the Freedom Summer was a significant event, leading many others to become active in 
the campaigns; Interpretation 2 is suggesting that it had limited impact and that it led to people 
questioning the methods used. 
  

 
  
Question  
3 (d) 
How far do you agree with Interpretation 2 about the Freedom Summer 
(1964)?  Explain your answer, using both interpretations, and your knowledge 
of the historical context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of interpretations. 
AO4: 16 marks. 
Spelling, punctuation, grammar and the use of specialist terminology 
(SPaG): up to 4 additional marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–4 
• Answer offers simple valid comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Limited analysis of one interpretation is shown by selection 
and inclusion of some detail in the form of simple paraphrase or direct 
quotation. Generalised contextual knowledge is included and linked to the 
evaluation. 
2 5–8 
• Answer offers valid evaluative comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Some analysis is shown in selecting and including details 
from both interpretations to support this comment. Some relevant 
contextual knowledge is included and linked to the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given but its justification is insecure or undeveloped and a 
line of reasoning is not sustained. 
3 9–12 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation, agreeing or disagreeing with the 
interpretation. Good analysis of the interpretations is shown indicating 
difference of view and deploying this to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is used directly to support the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given with some justification and a line of reasoning is 
generally sustained. 
4 13–16 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation reviewing the alternative views in 
coming to a substantiated judgement. Precise analysis of the 
interpretations is shown, indicating how the differences of view are 
conveyed and deploying this material to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is precisely selected to support the evaluation. An 
overall judgment is justified and the line of reasoning is coherent, 
sustained and logically structured. 
Marks for SPaG 
Performanc
e 
Mark Descriptor 
 0 
• The learner writes nothing. 
• The learner’s response does not relate to the question. 
• The learner’s achievement in SPaG does not reach the threshold 
performance level, e.g. errors in spelling, punctuation and grammar 
severely hinder meaning. 
Threshold 1 
• Learners spell and punctuate with reasonable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with some control of meaning and any 
errors do not significantly hinder meaning overall.  
• Learners use a limited range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
Intermediate 2–3 
• Learners spell and punctuate with considerable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with general control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a good range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
High 4 
• Learners spell and punctuate with consistent accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with effective control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a wide range of specialist terms as appropriate. 

 
 
 
 
 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the interpretations. 
In all levels, the second sentence relates to analysis and while the rest relate to evaluation. The 
following rules will apply: 
• In Level 1, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis without evidence of 
evaluation should be awarded 1 mark. 
• In other levels, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis (but that also fully 
meet the descriptors for evaluation of the level below) should be awarded no more than the bottom 
mark in the level. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The 
grouping of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their 
answers.  
The interpretation to be evaluated suggests that the Freedom Summer achieved very little in 
terms of progress for the civil rights movement. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which support the claim made in the 
interpretation may include: 
• Interpretation 2 states that the Freedom Summer could be seen as a failure because so few black 
Americans became registered to vote. 
• Interpretation 2 states that the cost of the failure of the Freedom Summer led some civil rights 
workers to become disillusioned with the idea of non-violence. 
• Interpretation 2 states that the failure of the Freedom Summer led some black American activists 
to reject the involvement of white civil rights workers. 
• Attacks on civil rights workers were carried out with impunity since the authorities were often 
involved in the attacks. 
• After the Freedom Summer, the volunteers returned to the North while activists in the South 
continued to face harassment and persecution. 
• The publicity about the murders of Chaney, Schwerner and Goodman contributed to long-term 
divisions within the civil rights movement over the use of non-violent tactics.   
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which counter the view may include:  
• Interpretation 1 suggests that the Freedom Summer led to progress in civil rights because so many 
people were involved in voter registration preparation. 
• Interpretation 1 suggests that the Freedom Summer would help to develop black Americans’ pride 
by providing education not only in key skills but also in black American history. 
• Interpretation 1 shows that the Freedom Summer was intended to have long-lasting effects, not 
just by encouraging black Americans to participate in politics but also by training them to be able to 
lead more civil rights campaigns in the future.  
• The Freedom Summer involved a number of civil rights groups acting in combination, showing a 
new level of cooperation in the movement. 
• The involvement of so many students from the North led to publicity and a better understanding of 
the problems faced by black Americans in the South. 
• The passing of the Voting Rights Act (1965) suggests that the campaigns of the Freedom Summer 
had an impact on national affairs.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828  
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom 