

Mark Scheme (Results) 
 
Summer 2024 
 
Pearson Edexcel GCSE 
In History (1HI0) 
Paper 3: Modern depth study  
 
Option 33: The USA, 1954-75: 
conflict at home and abroad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications 
 
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body. We provide a 
wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and specific programmes for 
employers.   For   further   information   visit   our   qualifications   websites   at www.edexcel.com or 
www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at 
www.edexcel.com/contactus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere 
 
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone progress in 
their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they 
are in the world. We’ve been involved in education  for  over  150  years,  and  by  working  across  70 
countries,  in  100  languages,  we  have  built  an  international  reputation  for  our  commitment  to  high 
standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can 
help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summer 2024 
Question Paper Log Number P76418A 
Publications Code 1HI0_33_2406_MS 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Ltd 2025 
 
  

 
General Marking Guidance 
  
  
• All candidates must receive the same treatment.  Examiners must 
mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the 
last. 
• Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be 
rewarded  for  what  they  have  shown  they  can  do  rather  than 
penalised for omissions. 
• Examiners   should  mark   according  to  the  mark  scheme   not 
according to their perception of where the grade boundaries may 
lie. 
• There is no ceiling on achievement. All marks on the mark scheme 
should be used appropriately. 
• All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. 
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the 
answer  matches  the  mark  scheme.  Examiners  should  also  be 
prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not 
worthy of credit according to the mark scheme. 
• Where  some  judgement  is  required,  mark  schemes  will  provide 
the principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification 
may be limited. 
• When  examiners  are  in  doubt  regarding  the  application  of  the 
mark scheme to a candidate’s response, the team leader must be 
consulted. 
• Crossed  out  work  should  be  marked  UNLESS  the  candidate  has 
replaced it with an alternative response. 
 
  

 
How to award marks when level descriptions are used 
1. Finding the right level 
The first stage is to decide which level the answer should be placed in. To do this, use a ‘best-fit’ approach, 
deciding which level most closely describes the quality of the answer. Answers can display characteristics 
from more than one level, and where this happens markers must use the guidance below and their 
professional judgement to decide which level is most appropriate. 
For example, one stronger passage at L4 would not by itself merit a L4 mark, but it might be evidence to 
support a high L3 mark, unless there are substantial weaknesses in other areas. Similarly, an answer that fits 
best in L3 but which has some characteristics of L2 might be placed at the bottom of L3. An answer 
displaying some characteristics of L3 and some of L1 might be placed in L2. 
 
2. Finding a mark within a level 
After a level has been decided on, the next stage is to decide on the mark within the level. The instructions 
below tell you how to reward responses within a level. However, where a level has specific guidance about 
how to place an answer within a level, always follow that guidance. 
Levels containing two marks only 
Start with the presumption that the work will be at the top of the level. Move down to the lower 
mark if the work only just meets the requirements of the level. 
Levels containing three or more marks 
Markers should be prepared to use the full range of marks available in a level and not restrict marks to 
the middle. Markers should start at the middle of the level (or the upper-middle mark if there is an even 
number of marks) and then move the mark up or down to find the best mark. To do this, they should 
take into account how far the answer meets the requirements of the level: 
• If it meets the requirements fully, markers should be prepared to award full marks within the level. 
The top mark in the level is used for answers that are as good as can realistically be expected within 
that level 
• If it only barely meets the requirements of the level, markers should consider awarding marks at 
the bottom of the level. The bottom mark in the level is used for answers that are the weakest that 
can be expected within that level 
• The middle marks of the level are used for answers that have a reasonable match to the descriptor. 
This  might  represent  a balance between  some  characteristics  of the  level that  are  fully  met  and 
others that are only barely met. 
Indicative content 
Examiners are reminded that indicative content is provided as an illustration to markers of some of the 
material that may be offered by students. It does not show required content and alternatives should be 
credited where valid 
 
  

 
 
Modern depth study: The USA, 1954–75: conflict at home and abroad 
 
Question 
 
1 
Give two things you can infer from Source A about the treatment of Black Americans 
in the 1950s.  
Target: Source analysis (making inferences). 
AO3: 4 marks. 
Marking instructions 
Award 1 mark for each valid inference up to a maximum of two inferences. The second mark for each 
example should be awarded for supporting detail selected from the source. 
e.g. 
• Black Americans were not even safe in their own homes (1). An armed attack was made on the 
home of Robert Williams and white racists tried to intimidate Black Americans by driving through his 
neighbourhood firing guns (1).  
• Black Americans were not protected by the police (1). Law enforcement officials were involved in the 
attacks and the police Chief denied an attack had taken place (1). 
• Black Americans were targeted if they campaigned for integration (1). An armed attack was made on 
the home of Robert Williams, who had led a campaign for integration at the local swimming pool (1). 
Accept other appropriate alternatives. 
 

 
  
  
Question  
2 Explain why the USA was not able to win the war against the Vietcong in the years 
1964–73. 
 
You may use the following in your answer: 
• the Vietcong use of booby traps 
• the US use of Agent Orange 
You must also use information of your own. 
Target: Analysis of second order concepts: causation [AO2]; 
Knowledge and understanding of features and characteristics [AO1]. 
AO2: 6 marks. 
AO1: 6 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–3 
• A simple or generalised answer is given, lacking development and organisation. 
[AO2]  
• Limited knowledge and understanding of the topic is shown. [AO1] 
2 4–6 
• An explanation is given, showing limited analysis and with implicit or unsustained 
links to the conceptual focus of the question. It shows some development and 
organisation of material, but a line of reasoning is not sustained. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing some knowledge and 
understanding of the period. [AO1] 
 
3 7–9 
• An explanation is given, showing some analysis, which is mainly directed at the 
conceptual focus of the question. It shows a line of reasoning that is generally 
sustained, although some passages may lack coherence and organisation. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing good knowledge and 
understanding of the required features or characteristics of the period studied. 
[AO1] 
Maximum 8 marks for answers that do not address three or more aspects of 
content. 
4 10–12 
• An analytical explanation is given which is directed consistently at the conceptual 
focus of the question, showing a line of reasoning that is coherent, sustained and 
logically structured. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is precisely selected to address the question 
directly, showing wide-ranging knowledge and understanding of the required 
features or characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
No access to Level 4 for answers that do not address three or more aspects of 
content. 

 
 
  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Performance in AO1 and AO2 is interdependent. An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be 
awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should 
note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.  
The middle mark in each level may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. 
Relevant points may include: 
• It was difficult for the US troops to combat and defeat Vietcong guerrilla tactics such as the use of 
booby traps, tunnels and ambushes. 
• American tactics, for example, the use of chemical weapons such as Agent Orange, antagonised the 
Vietnamese population, making them likely to support the Vietcong against the Americans. 
• The nature of guerrilla warfare meant that combat was small-scale, preventing American troops from 
using their superior technology.  
• The morale of American troops, and therefore their commitment, was affected by the unpredictable 
nature of guerrilla warfare and the difficulties in identifying members of the Vietcong. 
• The Americans failed to win the ‘hearts and minds’ of peasants in South Vietnam; policies such as 
‘Strategic Hamlets’ and ‘Search and Destroy’ antagonised them. 
• Opposition to involvement in the war increased within the USA, making it difficult for politicians to 
justify funding the war. 

 
Question  
3 (a) 
How useful are Sources B and C for an enquiry into the achievements of Martin 
Luther King in the civil rights movement?  Explain your answer, using Sources B 
and C and your knowledge of the historical context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of source utility. 
AO3: 8 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple judgement on utility is given, and supported by undeveloped 
comment on the content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Simple 
comprehension of the source material is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content. Limited contextual knowledge is deployed with links to the 
sources. 
2 3–5 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, using valid 
criteria. Judgements are supported by developed comment related to the 
content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Comprehension and some 
analysis of the sources is shown by the selection and use of material to support 
comments on their utility. Contextual knowledge is used directly to support 
comments on the usefulness of the content of the sources and/or their 
provenance. 
3 6–8 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, applying valid 
criteria with developed reasoning which takes into account how the 
provenance
1
 affects the usefulness of the source content. The sources are 
analysed to support reasoning about their utility. Contextual knowledge is used 
in the process of interpreting the sources and applying criteria for judgements 
on their utility.  
Notes 
1. Provenance = nature, origin, purpose. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the sources. 
No credit may be given for generic comments on provenance which are not used to evaluate source 
content. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The grouping 
of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their answers.  
Source B  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• The photograph shows King waving to a huge crowd, suggesting he is a key figure in this event.  
• The size of the crowd suggests that there was huge support for the event and for King. 
• The photograph shows several cameras, all fixed on King, suggesting that the March will be seen as 
his achievement. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The photograph was probably intended to be publicised as part of a media campaign by the civil 
rights movement, highlighting the role of Martin Luther King. 
• The purpose of the photograph is to show the civil rights campaign coming together as a unified 
movement. 
 

 
  
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• The March on Washington and King’s ‘I have a dream’ speech became famous, especially as the 
demonstration was at a significant site – Washington DC is the seat of government. 
• This event took place at a key point in the civil rights campaign – King had recently been released 
from prison and events in Birmingham had highlighted the issues involved in the civil rights 
campaign. 
• The peaceful nature of the event and the size of the demonstration placed pressure on the Kennedy 
administration to be more supportive of the civil rights movement.  
Source C  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• Lucas’ account is useful because it gives a judgement on King’s work in Chicago and provides the 
context of what happened, showing that King had little impact on the situation.  
• Lucas shows that King personally was a significant figure as his presence temporarily prevented the 
splits emerging between Black activists and White activists, but he could not unite them. 
• Lucas’s account is useful as it suggests that divisions in the movement may have contributed to 
King’s failure to achieve his aims in Chicago. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• Lucas was a significant figure in the Chicago civil rights movement and also had worked closely with 
King, therefore his view carries weight. 
• Lucas was giving an interview at a later date, recalling the situation in 1966, so his account may have 
been influenced by later events. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• The situation in Chicago was different from the overt segregation of the Southern states and King’s 
tactics were less effective outside the South. 
• Many northern activists had opposed King’s emphasis on non-violence and Black consciousness 
became more influential among some groups of urban Black Americans. 

 
Question  
3 (b) 
Study Interpretations 1 and 2. They give different views about the achievements of 
Martin Luther King in the civil rights movement. 
What is the main difference between these views? Explain your answer, using 
details from both interpretations. 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (how they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• Limited analysis of the interpretations is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content, but differences of surface detail only are given, or a difference 
of view is asserted without direct support. 
2 3–4 
 
• The interpretations are analysed and a key difference of view is identified and 
supported from them. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive and other relevant 
material not suggested below must also be credited. 
• A main difference is that Interpretation 1 suggests Martin Luther King was a key person in the civil 
rights movement and directly responsible for much of the progress, while Interpretation 2, on the 
other hand, emphasises his failures and the lack of progress, and suggests that there was growing 
support for alternative approaches to civil rights.  
  

 
Question  
3 (c) 
Suggest one reason why Interpretations 1 and 2 give different views about the 
achievements of Martin Luther King in the civil rights movement. You may use 
Sources B and C to help explain your answer. 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (why they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple valid explanation is offered but displaying only limited analysis. Support 
for the explanation is based on simple undeveloped comment or on the selection 
of details from the provided material or own knowledge, with only implied 
linkage to the explanation. 
2 3–4 
• An explanation of a reason for difference is given, analysing the interpretations. 
The explanation is substantiated effectively.  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive. The examples below 
show different approaches to explaining difference, any one of which may be valid. Other valid material 
must be credited. 
• The interpretations may differ because the authors have given weight to different sources. For 
example, Source B suggests King’s speech in 1963 was a significant event in the civil rights 
campaign, which provides some support for Interpretation 1’s view that he was a key individual in 
the movement, while Source C shows King failed to achieve much in Chicago, which provides some 
support for Interpretation 2’s view that King’s campaigns failed to achieve much actual change in 
the situation of many northern Black Americans. 
• The interpretations may differ because the authors have a different perspective. Interpretation 1 
considers King’s impact on a national and international level while Interpretation 2 focuses on the 
situation in the North, and especially Chicago, in 1966. 
• They may differ because the authors have a different emphasis – Interpretation 1 is summarising 
King’s achievements up to 1965 while Interpretation 2 is explaining his failure in 1966. 
  

 
  
Question  
3 (d) 
How far do you agree with Interpretation 2 about the achievements of Martin 
Luther King in the civil rights movement? Explain your answer, using both 
interpretations, and your knowledge of the historical context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of interpretations. 
AO4: 16 marks. 
Spelling, punctuation, grammar and the use of specialist terminology 
(SPaG): up to 4 additional marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–4 
• Answer offers simple valid comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Limited analysis of one interpretation is shown by selection 
and inclusion of some detail in the form of simple paraphrase or direct 
quotation. Generalised contextual knowledge is included and linked to the 
evaluation. 
2 5–8 
• Answer offers valid evaluative comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Some analysis is shown in selecting and including details 
from both interpretations to support this comment. Some relevant 
contextual knowledge is included and linked to the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given but its justification is insecure or undeveloped and a 
line of reasoning is not sustained. 
3 9–12 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation, agreeing or disagreeing with the 
interpretation. Good analysis of the interpretations is shown indicating 
difference of view and deploying this to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is used directly to support the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given with some justification and a line of reasoning is 
generally sustained. 
4 13–16 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation reviewing the alternative views in 
coming to a substantiated judgement. Precise analysis of the 
interpretations is shown, indicating how the differences of view are 
conveyed and deploying this material to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is precisely selected to support the evaluation. An 
overall judgment is justified and the line of reasoning is coherent, 
sustained and logically structured. 
Marks for SPaG 
Performanc
e 
Mark Descriptor 
 0 
• The learner writes nothing. 
• The learner’s response does not relate to the question. 
• The learner’s achievement in SPaG does not reach the threshold 
performance level, e.g. errors in spelling, punctuation and grammar 
severely hinder meaning. 
Threshold 1 
• Learners spell and punctuate with reasonable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with some control of meaning and any 
errors do not significantly hinder meaning overall.  
• Learners use a limited range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
Intermediate 2–3 
• Learners spell and punctuate with considerable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with general control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a good range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
High 4 
• Learners spell and punctuate with consistent accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with effective control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a wide range of specialist terms as appropriate. 

 
 
 
 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828  
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the interpretations. 
In all levels, the second sentence relates to analysis and while the rest relate to evaluation. The 
following rules will apply: 
• In Level 1, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis without evidence of 
evaluation should be awarded 1 mark. 
• In other levels, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis (but that also fully 
meet the descriptors for evaluation of the level below) should be awarded no more than the bottom 
mark in the level. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The 
grouping of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their 
answers.  
The interpretation to be evaluated suggests that King’s campaigns failed to make much 
difference to the lives of Black Americans. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which support the claim made in the 
interpretation may include: 
• Interpretation 2 states that King’s achievement included the passing of the new Civil Rights laws 
but that these had little impact on the daily lives of Black Americans.  
• Interpretation 2 shows that King was less effective in the north and gives a specific example of 
King’s failed campaign in Chicago to end discrimination in housing. 
• Many city authorities were reluctant to implement the new Civil Rights laws, for example closing 
down facilities rather than allowing them to be integrated, meaning that King’s achievements were 
mainly theoretical rather than concrete. 
• Many authorities, such as the police and the law courts, were reluctant to take action when the new 
laws were broken, or to protect Black Americans trying to exercise their rights, so King’s work in 
getting laws passed had little impact. 
• Malcolm X challenged King’s policy of non-violence, saying that Black Americans should be willing 
to fight back against discrimination, using violence where necessary. The idea of ‘Black Power’ was 
gaining support, especially from younger Black Americans, who were impatient with King’s tactics 
and were not prepared to wait for equal rights to be given to them by the White-led authorities. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which counter the view may include:  
• Interpretation 1 states that King’s non-violent approach was important as it allowed people in 
authority to support the movement, meaning that there was a better chance of laws being passed 
and enforced. 
• Interpretation 1 shows that King was personally responsible for much of the media and 
international attention, which placed pressure on the government to make changes, such as the 
Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act. 
• King was an important figurehead in the civil rights movement: being arrested in Birmingham, 
leading the march in Selma, his home being attacked and his assassination. 
• King was often in communication with President Kennedy and his brother, Robert, who was US 
Attorney General.  
• King was an inspiring speaker and prolific writer, meaning that he provided leadership and support, 
as well as gaining publicity for the civil rights movement. 