

Examiners’ Report
June 2025
GCSE History 1HI0 33

Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications come from Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body. We provide
a   wide   range   of   qualifications   including   academic,   vocational,   occupational   and   specific
programmes   for   employers.   For   further   information   visit   our   qualifications   websites   at
https://www.edexcel.com or https://www.btec.co.uk.
Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page.
Giving you insight to inform next steps
ResultsPlus  is  Pearson’s  free  online  service  giving  instant  and  detailed  analysis  of  your  students'
exam results.
•See students' scores for every exam question.
•Understand how your students' performance compares with class and national averages.
•Identify  potential  topics,  skills  and  types  of  question  where  students  may  need  to  develop
their learning further.
For more information on ResultsPlus, or to log in, visit https://www.edexcel.com/resultsplus. Your
exams officer will be able to set up your ResultsPlus account in minutes via Edexcel Online.
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone progress
in  their  lives  through  education.  We  believe  in  every  kind  of  learning,  for  all  kinds  of  people,
wherever  they  are  in  the  world.  We’ve  been  involved  in  education  for  over  150  years,  and  by
working across 70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an international reputation for our
commitment  to  high  standards  and  raising  achievement  through  innovation  in  education.  Find
out more about how we can help you and your students at: https://www.pearson.com/uk.
June 2025
Publications Code 1HI0_33_2506_ER
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Ltd 2025
GCSE History 1HI0 331

Introduction
Examiners  commented  that  most  candidates  seemed  to  find  the  paper  accessible  and  were
confident  in  tackling  the  various  questions.  They  coped  well  with  the  range  of  question  styles,
which  covered  all  four  Assessment  Objectives,  and  they  responded  particularly  well  to  the
enquiry ‘package’ in question 3.
This year, there was a change to the examination paper and candidates were able to choose from
two options for question 2. This allowed for a wider range of content to be covered and allowed
more candidates to attempt an answer.
Questions on this paper cover all the Assessment Objectives but over half of the available marks
are  for  question  3,  which  focuses  on  sources  and  interpretations.  These  questions  form  a
coherent  package  leading  to  a  final  question  in  which  candidates,  having  explored  the  utility  of
the  provided  sources,  analyse  the  different  views  presented  in  the  interpretations  and  the
reasons  for  those  differences,  and  are  then  invited  to  judge  the  extent  to  which  they  agree  with
one  of  the  interpretations.  It  is  therefore  important  that  candidates  appreciate  the  difference
between sources and interpretations, and the focus of different parts of question 3.
In   particular,   there   are   still   a   number   of   candidates   who   find   it   difficult   to   explain   why
interpretations  differ  (question  3c).  When  they  are  asked  about  a  reason  for  the  different  views,
candidates  should  remember  that  the  authors  have  constructed  these  interpretations  and
chosen to present them in this specific way. The most common explanation was that the authors
had  chosen  to  place  weight  on  different  sources,  but  it  is  important  to  support  this  with  details
from the interpretations and the sources in order to meet the mark scheme requirement that ‘An
explanation of a reason for difference is given, analysing the interpretations. The explanation is
substantiated  effectively’.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  it  is  not  possible  to  provide  effectively
substantiated reasons why the interpretations are different, based on such things as where and
when the interpretations were published, unless it is assumed that everyone writing in a specific
year shared the same view.
The focus of question 3d is on the interpretations and candidates who provide their own view of
the  issue  in  the  question  are  unlikely  to  access  the  higher  levels  of  the  mark  scheme.  Similarly,
every  level  of  the  mark  scheme  above  Level  1  refers  to  ‘interpretations’.  There  is  no  expectation
that  both  interpretations  are  dealt  with  in  equal  depth,  but  both  should  be  examined  explicitly.
Answers  which  only  analyse  one  interpretation  can  score  above  Level  1  if  they  perform  well  in
other strands of the mark scheme but are unlikely to achieve a high mark.
The  use  of  contextual  knowledge  is  an  important  element  in  this  evaluation,  but  it  must  be
precisely selected to support the evaluation and not just used to display knowledge of aspects of
the  topic  which  the  candidate  has  revised  but  which  are  not  relevant  to  the  enquiry.  Candidates
should  be  reminded  that  the  content  from  the  sources  provided  may  be  used  to  provide
contextual knowledge for the interpretations.
Candidates  who  have  already  explained  the  difference  between  the  interpretations  in  question
3b  will  have  used  this  knowledge  in  their  answer  to  question  3c  as  they  review  the  alternative
views being offered. A feature of strong answers is to show an understanding of how the authors
have conveyed their different views. This could be through their use of language, the tone of their
2GCSE History 1HI0 33

writing,  their  choice  of  details  to  include  or  omit,  and  their  decision  of  how  to  present  their
material. Answers need to show an understanding that the author has chosen what language to
use  or  what  to  emphasise;  they  do  not  need  to  judge  how  effective  this.  This  is  even  more
effective if it is worked into the answer rather than left as a stand-alone comment. For example,
‘the author presents this as a positive aspect’, ‘the interpretation focuses on ... and omits ...’, ‘the
language is very critical’ or ‘only including this at the end plays down its significance’.
A full range of responses suggest this question was accessible to candidates of all abilities and full
answers were generally provided, showing that timing wasn’t generally an issue on this paper.
GCSE History 1HI0 333

Question 1
This  question  requires  candidates  to  make  two  inferences  from  a  source  and  it  is  sometimes
regarded  as  an  ‘easy’  question.  However,  candidates  need  to  be  sure  that  the  inferences  they
make from the source are not based on their own knowledge as this question assesses AO3 and
no  marks  are  available  for  AO1  (knowledge  and  understanding).  They  also  need  to  ensure  the
inferences they make relate to the enquiry in the question.
The  focus  of  the  question  was  about  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail.  There  were  two  marks  available  for
each  valid  inference  –  one  for  the  inference  itself  and  one  for  the  supporting  information.  Most
candidates seemed to understand how to make an inference, and most used the content of the
source  to  provide  support  for  the  inference.  Such  candidates  tended  to  make  inferences
regarding  the  people  using  the  trail  being  civilians,  or  that  the  terrain  was  tricky.  However,  a
number focused on the fact that it was used as a supply route, which was stated, so could not be
an  inference.  Quite  a  number  of  candidates  focused  on  the  people  rather  than  the  trail.  It  was
also noteworthy that a significant number of candidates used their own knowledge about the Ho
Chi  Minh  trail,  rather  than  making  an  actual  inference.  It  should  be  recognised  that  details  from
the source can only be rewarded if they are provided as support for an inference. No marks were
available for candidates who provided simple descriptions of the source as inferences.
4GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 335

The  first  inference  is  valid,  as  is  the  support,  but  the  second  is  not  about  the  Ho  Chi  Minh
trail and is, therefore, not valid.
Candidates should ensure they understand exactly what the inferences need to be about, in
this case the Ho Chi Minh trail.
6GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 337

Both inferences are valid and appropriate support from the source is provided.
Students should ensure that the inferences are genuine inferences and not just things they
know about the Ho Chi Minh trail.
8GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 2(a)
In  question  2,  the  focus  will  always  be  on  causation  but  the  question  does  not  require  a
judgement to be made or for the answer to prioritise or show interaction of factors and no marks
were available to reward such evaluation, however strongly argued. Instead, the most successful
candidates showed a consistent analytical focus throughout their answers and many were able to
access Level 4 by doing so.
The stimulus points in the question will often be useful reminders to candidates of specific areas
of content about which they can write. Candidates do not need to use these stimulus points but
there is an expectation that there will be some depth of knowledge at the higher levels, shown by
three discrete aspects of content being covered, although this does not mean candidates need to
identify three different causes or events.
A number of answers remained at Level 3, despite excellent knowledge, because they missed the
focus  of  the  question.  The  mark  scheme’s  bullet  point  for  Assessment  Objective  2  (analysis)  at
Level  4  expects  an  analytical  explanation,  directed  consistently  at  the  conceptual  focus  of  the
question.  Candidates  who  responded  to  the  topic  rather  than  the  key  idea  were  unlikely  to
achieve high marks. Those who did reach Level 4 realised that the topic provides the context but
that there is a specific focus, which the analysis should address.
Question  2a  was  the  most  popular  of  the  2  options,  and  was  focused  on  why  the  Montgomery
Bus Boycott was successful. This question was answered well on the whole with less L1 answers
than in previous series. Almost all candidates were able to write about Rosa Parks, the events of
the boycott and provide detail about Martin Luther King and his involvement in the MIA. The level
of knowledge in answers rarely went below Level 2 and in many cases the knowledge strand was
the stronger of the two. Most answers which had 3 factors covered were able to get into L3 or L4
for  AO1.  The  better  answers  included  specific  examples  and  developed  their  points.  Candidates
were  able  to  sustain  their  focus  on  the  question  and  include  analytical  explanations  showing  a
variety  of  ways  in  which  the  events  of  the  boycott  could  be  seen  as  successful.  For  example,
candidates  were  able  to  show  both  the  ways  in  which  the  boycott  led  to  legal  change  as  well  as
focusing on psychological factors such as solidarity and community. Lots of candidates were able
to focus on methods set up by the MIA which enabled the boycott to continue for the amount of
time  which  was  necessary  for  it  to  be  a  success.  Less  successful  candidates  tended  to  just
describe what Rosa Parks did.
GCSE History 1HI0 339

10GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3311

This   answer   achieved   a   level   3   mark.   Good   knowledge   and   understanding   of   the
features/period was shown and there was some analysis, mainly directed at the focus of the
question.
Make sure you address the focus of the question and not just the topic.
12GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3313

14GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3315

This  response  received  a  high  level  4  mark.  An  analytical  explanation  was  given,  it  was
coherent  and  logically  structured  and  accurate  and  relevant  information  was  precisely
selected to address the question.
Make  sure  each  point  is  explained  (not  just  stated)  and  try  to  include  precise  details  to
support each point of analysis.
16GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 2(b)
Question  2b  was  the  least  popular  of  the  options,  and  was  focused  on  why  the  Black  power
movement emerged in the 1960s. This question was significantly less popular than option 2a and
was  not  answered  as  well  overall.  Many  candidates  who  did  attempt  the  question  found  it
difficult  to  retain  their  focus  and  often  wandered  into  telling  a  narrative  of  events  which
happened  prior  to  the  emergence  of  Black  Power.  It  was  clear  from  some  answers  that
candidates were using the term Black Power as a catch all for the events of the 1950s and 1960s
and  so  some  of  what  was  written  at  times  was  irrelevant  to  the  focus  of  the  question.  Many
candidates were aware of what was meant by the stimulus material term ‘Black Culture’ and were
aware  of  Stokely  Carmichael,  but  many  were  unclear  on  exactly  what  he  had  done  and  even
fewer were able to link Black Culture successfully as a reason for the emergence of Black Power.
High-level  responses  went  beyond  the  material  provided,  introducing  additional  relevant  factors
such  as  the  1968  Mexico  Olympics  protest,  the  emergence  of  the  Black  Panther  Party,  and
growing frustration with the perceived ineffectiveness of non-violent protest — in particular using
Stokely  Carmichael  as  an  example.  The  influence  of  Malcolm  X  was  also  used  effectively  to
highlight  a  shift  in  attitude  and  tactics  during  this  period.  In  some  cases,  candidates  included
references to Malcolm X, though a number of these responses simply provided a brief biography.
Where responses were more analytical, they connected Malcolm X’s criticism of non-violence and
his emphasis on Black pride and autonomy to the rising appeal of more radical movements. This
demonstrated  a  clear  understanding  of  how  his  ideas  resonated  with  those  disillusioned  by  the
slow progress of mainstream civil rights efforts. By contrast, weaker responses tended to rely on
vague or overly general claims without providing supporting examples or linking their arguments
to  the  specific  context  of  the  1960s.  As  a  result,  these  answers  lacked  the  detail  and  relevance
needed to fully address the question.
GCSE History 1HI0 3317

18GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3319

This  answer  achieved  a  level  2  mark.  Accurate  and  relevant  information  was  included,
showing some knowledge and understanding and an explanation was given showing limited
analysis.
Make sure you explain clearly how the points you are making answer the question.
20GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3321

22GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3323

This  response  received  a  high  level  4  mark.  An  analytical  explanation  was  given,  it  was
coherent  and  logically  structured  and  accurate  and  relevant  information  was  precisely
selected to address the question.
You  don’t  need  to  write  down  everything  you  know  about  a  topic,  just  ensure  that  the
material you select is appropriate and is focused on answering the question.
24GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 3(a)
Question 3 (a) targets the ability to analyse and evaluate source utility and, in doing so, introduces
the enquiry which will be dealt with in further detail in questions 3(b), 3(c) and 3(d).
In question 3 (a) students are expected to evaluate the usefulness of the content, taking account
of  the  provenance  of  the  sources  and  applying  contextual  knowledge  in  making  judgements
about the utility of the sources as evidence for the specific enquiry, in this case the escalation of
US  involvement  in  the  conflict  in  Vietnam  in  the  1960s.  These  strands  in  the  mark  scheme  are
linked and should be dealt with together, rather than in isolation.
Candidates  found  the  sources  accessible  and  were  confident  in  showing  that  the  content  of  the
sources  was  relevant  for  the  enquiry  and  therefore  useful.  They  could  also  make  a  number  of
points  about  the  significance  of  the  provenance  for  the  usefulness  of  the  content,  although
sometimes  this  consisted  of  basic  statements  rather  than  a  developed  explanation.  When
considering provenance, generic comments about a source being biased (with no explanation of
how that bias could be detected or why it occurred) or about the source being reliable because it
came  from  the  time  under  investigation,  could  be  made  without  any  reference  to  the  individual
source and therefore remained at Level 1. This type of generic assumption was seen when some
answers  assumed  that  the  authors  of  the  sources  would  be  biased  or  that  a  source’s  accuracy
would be affected by the passage of time.
At  Level  2,  developed  comments  were  made  about  the  content  of  the  sources,  for  example,  the
evidence  source  B  provided  about  the  willingness  of  Kennedy  to  increase  US  involvement.  This
was  often  backed  up  by  contextual  knowledge  about  the  reasons  for  this,  including  the  Domino
Theory.
There  were  also  good  comments  made  about  the  provenance  of  the  sources,  for  example  that
Source B was from a top-secret document, thus giving a valuable insight into important decision
making.
However,  some  very  good  answers  could  not  access  the  higher  marks  because  they  did  not
include  contextual  knowledge.  Contextual  knowledge  is  mentioned  at  every  level  of  the  mark
scheme and failure to include it limited a number of otherwise good answers. Candidates should
recognise  that  it  is  not  enough  to  repeat  a  detail  from  the  source  and  assert  that  this  can  be
confirmed from the candidate’s own knowledge or to give generalised comments such as ‘I know
that Johnson increased US involvement' – some additional detail is needed as a demonstration of
that own knowledge. Contextual knowledge should be relevant to the enquiry and used to assess
the source, for example to add detail about something mentioned in the source, to add weight to
an aspect of the provenance, to place the source in a broader context, or to assess whether the
source gave an accurate view or showed a typical situation.
At  Level  3,  comments  need  to  consider  the  effect  of  an  aspect  of  the  provenance  on  the
usefulness  of  the  source  content,  and  contextual  knowledge  should  be  integrated  into  the
process of reaching a judgement, not simply provided as information.
It is important to note that the question asks about the usefulness of the sources in relation to a
specific  enquiry.  Sources  should  not  be  dismissed  because  they  do  not  cover  every  detail  that
might be helpful in an investigation and candidates should recognise that unreliable sources can
GCSE History 1HI0 3325

be very useful.
Similarly,  the  focus  should  be  on  assessing  the  usefulness  of  what  is  in  the  source  rather  than
listing  details  which  are  not  mentioned.  It  can  be  valid  to  note  the  limitations  of  a  source  but
these points need to be used in an overall evaluation of the usefulness of the source; an answer
which  focuses  on  ‘missing’  information  without  weighing  the  positive  aspects  of  the  source,  is
unlikely  to  score  highly.  If  the  answer  identifies  omissions  from  the  source  as  limitations  on  its
usefulness, this could be linked to a consideration of the provenance, showing whether this is the
result of lack of knowledge or deliberate omission.
The  question  asks  ‘how  useful’  the  sources  are,  so  a  judgement  should  be  made  on  the
usefulness of the source’s evidence for the specific enquiry. Good answers made clear the criteria
being  used  to  assess  the  usefulness  for  the  enquiry  of  the  sources,  weighing  the  value  of  the
content in the light of the provenance and the candidate’s own knowledge. Various criteria could
be used, for example accuracy of detail, reliability, the relevance of the source, the way it could be
used by the historian, and how representative the source is.
Very few answers only considered one source but it should be noted that every level of the mark
scheme  refers  to  ‘sources’  and  therefore  answers  which  do  not  consider  both  sources  cannot
access high marks.
26GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3327

28GCSE History 1HI0 33

Both  sources  are  evaluated  in  terms  of  accuracy,  using  contextual  knowledge  to  test  the
content of the sources. Both also make some comment about the provenance and a limited
comment  about  how  the  provenance  could  impact  the  usefulness  of  the  content,  though
this is not developed.
Evaluate the provenance rather than just repeating the attribution.
GCSE History 1HI0 3329

30GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3331

Level 3 is achieved for both sources. The candidate uses contextual knowledge to effectively
evaluate the content of the sources, not just as evidence of what they know. Reasoning takes
into account how the provenance affects the content of the sources.
Rather than making several points about the source content, make sure you cover content,
provenance and contextual knowledge.
32GCSE History 1HI0 33

Question 3(b)c
In this question, candidates are asked to identify a difference in the overall views being offered in
the interpretations; these do not necessarily contradict each other but they do provide alternative
views.  The  answers  should  identify  the  key  difference  but  also  provide  support  from  each
interpretation to demonstrate that difference.
Many   answers   recognised   that   the   two   interpretations   offered   different   views   about   the
escalation of US involvement in the conflict in Vietnam in the 1960s and could select detail from
the two interpretations to support the explanation of that difference. The vast majority identified
the  difference  as  being  who  was  responsible.  However,  some  answers  simply  selected  details
from the interpretations without explaining how these demonstrated the difference in the overall
views.
It  is  important  for  candidates  to  remember  that  the  focus  of  this  question  is  to  identify  the
differences  between  the  views  rather  than  identifying  differences  of  surface  detail  as  the  latter
can only be awarded marks in Level 1. Responses which asserted differences without support, for
example stayed in level 1.
Level  2  was  achieved  when  the  candidates  indicated  a  clear  difference  of  view  and  supported  it
with detail from the extracts. It was pleasing to see that many candidates were able to score full
marks.
It  is  important  that  candidates  recognise  the  relationship  between  questions  3b  and  3c.  Having
identified  that  the  two  interpretations  offer  different  views,  candidates  are  asked  to  suggest  a
reason  why  these  different  views  have  been  reached.  They  should  be  able  to  support  their
answer with reference to the interpretations but they should also make sure that their answer to
3(c) does not simply repeat their answer to 3(b).
It  is  clear  that  candidates  have  become  more  confident  in  answering  this  question,  particularly
those  who  understood  that  historians  use  sources  as  the  building  blocks  to  form  views  and
interpretations. These candidates often used Sources B and C to exemplify this historical process.
However, a significant minority of candidates still do not answer this question effectively and are
still  making  assertions  about  the  publication  date  being  of  significance  without  being  able  to
prove this.
The  focus  here  is  on  the  process  by  which  the  historian  produces  their  interpretation.  Where
answers suggested that when carrying out research, the authors had placed weight on different
sources,  candidates  could  easily  score  the  full  4  marks  by  linking  details  in  the  interpretations
with  details  in  Sources  B  and  C.  However,  this  should  be  explained  with  references  to  both  the
interpretations  and  the  sources  rather  than  simply  stating  that  ‘the  author  of  Interpretation  1
might  have  used  Source  B’.  They  should  also  try  to  avoid  statements  such  as  ‘Interpretation  2
supports  Source  C’  as  this  suggests  they  have  not  understood  the  relationship  between  the
sources and the interpretations.
Alternative  explanations  also  recognise  that  the  historian’s  approach  may  affect  their  research
and  conclusions.  For  example,  whether  an  historian  focuses  on  economic  or  political  impacts.
Here  again,  the  explanation  needs  to  be  supported  by  the  use  of  the  interpretations.  Therefore,
speculation  that  the  difference  in  interpretation  is  a  result  of  their  provenance,  for  example  the
GCSE History 1HI0 3333

date  that  the  interpretations  were  produced,  is  not  valid  as  it  cannot  be  supported  with  explicit
details. The full reasons for this are explained in the Getting Started Guide_on pp 43-44. As stated in
_Getting Started: ‘Students should distinguish between their comments on contemporary sources
and on these texts. Responses based on matters such as the origin or time of production of these
secondary works are unlikely to be valid for this question.’
34GCSE History 1HI0 33

In  question  3b,  the  candidate  has  understood  the  difference  but  has  not  evidenced  this
understanding  from  the  content  of  the  interpretations.  In  question  3c,  the  candidate
indicates  that  there  is  a  connection  between  the  sources  and  interpretations,  but  does  not
evidence this with details from both.
Make  sure  you  are  showing  the  difference  in  views  about  the  enquiry  and  not  simply  the
difference in individual details.
GCSE History 1HI0 3335

36GCSE History 1HI0 33

The  answer  for  question  3b  shows  clear  analysis  of  the  interpretations.  A  key  difference  in
view  has  been  identified  and  supported  with  evidence  from  both  interpretations.  The
answer for question 3c has given a valid reason for the difference in view and has been able
to evidence that reason from the interpretations.
Make sure you are able to evidence the reason you have given. It is not necessary to provide
quotes  as  long  as  you  are  able  to  evidence  clearly  the  content  of  the  interpretations  and
sources as this answer does.
GCSE History 1HI0 3337

Question 3(d)
Question 3 (d) carries the highest number of marks on the paper. Successful candidates will have
already seen how the views in the interpretations are different, why this might be the case and, in
completing   3(a)   have   understood   that   there   is   likely   to   be   evidence   in   support   of   both
interpretations.  They  are  now  asked  how  far  they  agree  with  one  of  the  interpretations.  The
strongest answers to 3(d), therefore, focused clearly on the interpretations themselves, reviewing
the  alternative  views  and  coming  to  a  substantiated  judgement.  Candidates  need  to  recognise
that they are not being asked to treat the interpretation as a source and evaluate its reliability or
usefulness but to explain whether they think the historian has offered a valid view.
The use of contextual knowledge is an important element in every level of the mark scheme but it
must  be  precisely  selected  and  linked  to  the  evaluation  of  the  interpretation  rather  than  being
offered as an answer to the enquiry question. At the same time, merely asserting agreement with
points  in  the  interpretation  by  saying  ‘from  my  own  knowledge  I  know  this  to  be  true’  is  not
sufficient evidence of contextual knowledge.
Candidates often used details from Interpretation 1 to counter the view in Interpretation 2. At all
levels of the mark scheme answers are expected to analyse both interpretations and discuss the
difference  in  the  views  being  offered,  so  answers  should  be  explicit  in  their  references  to  the
Interpretations  rather  than  presenting  this  as  their  own  knowledge.  As  stated  above,  the
interpretations  do  not  need  to  be  dealt  with  in  equal  depth  but  both  should  be  examined
explicitly.
Examiners reported some impressive answers to 3(d) and many candidates were able to engage
confidently  with  the  interpretations,  taking  a  range  of  approaches.  In  addition,  some  of  the
strongest answers were able to show how the differences of view in the two interpretations were
conveyed,  for  example  through  the  use  of  language,  tone,  selection  or  omission  of  detail,  and
emphasis created by the structure of the interpretation.
Some  candidates,  however,  tried  too  hard  to  include  own  knowledge  and  sometimes  strayed
from the interpretations and question focus. Some tried to judge the utility of the interpretations
which was not required by the question. Others made reference to both the My Lai Massacre and
the  Tet  Offensive  without  linking  these  events  back  to  the  question.  Sadly  many  candidates
missed  the  obvious  point  that  the  USA’s  indirect  military  assistance  to  South  Vietnam  was  being
replaced by direct military intervention under Johnson.
It  is  expected  that  candidates  will  reach  a  judgement  when  answering  this  question  and  the
strongest  developed  their  evaluation  throughout  the  answer,  creating  a  consistently  argued
response.   Less   successful   answers   offered   points   to   support   the   views   expressed   in
interpretation  2,  then  used  interpretation  1  and  contextual  knowledge  to  challenge  those  views,
before  reaching  the  view  that  interpretation  2  was  ‘somewhat  accurate’  or  saying  that  they
‘partially  agreed'  with  the  view  in  Interpretation  2.  In  these  answers,  there  was  little  sense  of
evaluation, simply an explanation of the different views, with the acknowledgement that each had
some  valid  points.  The  strongest  answers  to  question  3(d),  therefore,  focused  clearly  on  the
interpretations  themselves,  integrating  evaluation  while  reviewing  the  alternative  views  and
coming to a substantiated judgement. Candidates who focused exclusively on the view provided
in interpretation 2 and used this as a basis for an essay based on their own knowledge were less
38GCSE History 1HI0 33

successful. The existence of the strands which make up AO4 leads to ‘best-fit marking'. All strands
are  considered  before  a  final  mark  is  decided  upon.  The  most  successful  candidates,  therefore,
were able to display evidence of a clear understanding of all three strands:
•the quality of the judgement based on reasoning
•the analysis of the provided interpretations
•the deployment of contextual knowledge to support the application of criteria.
Candidates  who  examine  precise  details  from  the  interpretations  and  then  use  their  own
knowledge to support these points are more likely to gain the higher levels.
GCSE History 1HI0 3339

40GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3341

This response achieved level 2 for every aspect of AO4. There is a simple judgement, some
analysis  of  the  interpretations  and  some  relevant  contextual  knowledge  linked  to  the
evaluation.
Know  what  your  judgement  is  before  you  start  to  write  your  answer.  In  this  way,  you  can
build up a coherent answer, with a consistent line of reasoning.
42GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3343

44GCSE History 1HI0 33

GCSE History 1HI0 3345

46GCSE History 1HI0 33

This is a high Level 4 response as Level 4 has been achieved in all of the strands of the mark
scheme  for  AO4.  There  is  a  sustained  evaluation  and  a  substantiated  judgement.  The
answer  analyses  both  interpretations  and  deploys  this  material  to  support  the  evaluation.
Relevant contextual knowledge has been precisely selected to support the evaluation.
Contextual  knowledge  should  be  integrated  into  the  evaluation  of  the  interpretation,  not
offered as information or as the candidate’s answer to the enquiry.
GCSE History 1HI0 3347

Paper Summary
Examiners  commented  that  there  were  a  number  of  impressive  answers  where  candidates
seemed  well  prepared  and  demonstrated  excellent  knowledge  being  deployed  to  support
thoughtful analysis and evaluation.
The following points should be noted:
•While  there  was  good  knowledge  of  some  topics,  candidates  cannot  rely  on  knowing  just  a
few key topics and hoping to use that information whatever question is asked.
•Inferences   are   not   the   same   as   comprehension   and   candidates   should   avoid   merely
describing what they see or re-wording what they read.
•Candidates need to recognise the specific focus of the question so that the information being
offered  is  shaped  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  question  rather  than  simply  describing  a
situation or including irrelevant material.
•Candidates  should  appreciate  the  difference  between  sources  and  interpretations  and  be
aware that interpretations are constructed by historians in order to offer their view of events.
•In  all  parts  of  Question  3,  it  is  helpful  to  be  explicit  about  the  source  or  interpretation  being
discussed.
Spelling,  punctuation  and  grammar  were  broadly  accurate  and  many  answers  used  specialist
terms with confidence but a poor standard of handwriting made a number of answers difficult to
mark and exacerbated the difficulty in understanding a badly expressed answer.
The SPaGST marks may be affected if there are weaknesses in these areas:
•Appropriate use of capital letters
•Correct use of apostrophes
•Weak grammar ('would of', ‘based off of’) and casual language, which is not appropriate in an
examination
•Paragraphs: failure to structure answers in paragraphs not only affects the SPaGST mark, but
may  also  make  it  difficult  for  the  examiner  to  identify  whether  three  different  aspects  have
been covered in question 2, or how well analysis and evaluation is developed in question 3.
If extra paper is taken, candidates should state clearly in the answer space for the question that it
has  been  continued  elsewhere  and  it  should  be  stated  where  the  rest  of  the  answer  has  been
written;  this  should  be  on  an  additional  sheet  rather  than  elsewhere  in  the  answer  booklet  and
should  be  clearly  labelled.  However,  in  many  cases  where  additional  paper  had  been  taken,  the
marks  had  already  been  attained  within  the  space  provided  rather  than  on  the  extra  paper  and
candidates  should  be  discouraged  from  assuming  that  lengthy  answers  will  automatically  score
highly.  Indeed,  candidates  taking  extra  paper  sometimes  ran  out  of  time  on  the  final,  high  mark
question and therefore disadvantaged themselves.
48GCSE History 1HI0 33

Grade boundaries
Grade  boundaries  for  this,  and  all  other  papers,  can  be  found  on  the  website  on  this  link:
https://qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/support-topics/results-certification/grade-
boundaries.html
GCSE History 1HI0 3349

Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL.