

Mark Scheme (Results)
Summer 2025 
Pearson Edexcel GCSE 
In History (1HI0) 
Paper 3: M
 
odern depth study 
Option 33: The USA, 1954-75: 
conflict at home and abroad 

 
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications 
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body.  
We provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and 
specific programmes for employers. For further information visit our qualifications websites 
at www.edexcel.com or www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the 
details on our contact us page at www.edexcel.com/contactus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere 
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone 
progress in their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of 
people, wherever they are in the world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150 years, and 
by working across 70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an international reputation for 
our commitment to high standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. 
Find out more about how we can help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summer 2025 
Question Paper Log Number P79014A 
Publications Code 1HI0_33_2506_MS 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Ltd 2025 
 
  

 
General Marking Guidance 
  
• All candidates must receive the same treatment.  Examiners must 
mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the last. 
• Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be 
rewarded for what they have shown they can do rather than penalised 
for omissions. 
• Examiners should mark according to the mark scheme not according 
to their perception of where the grade boundaries may lie. 
• There is no ceiling on achievement. All marks on the mark scheme 
should be used appropriately. 
• All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. 
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the 
answer matches the mark scheme.  Examiners should also be 
prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not 
worthy of credit according to the mark scheme. 
• Where some judgement is required, mark schemes will provide the 
principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification may be 
limited. 
• When examiners are in doubt regarding the application of the mark 
scheme to a candidate’s response, the team leader must be consulted. 
• Crossed out work should be marked UNLESS the candidate has 
replaced it with an alternative response. 
 
  

 
How to award marks when level descriptions are used 
1. Finding the right level 
The first stage is to decide which level the answer should be placed in. To do this, use a ‘best-
fit’ approach, deciding which level most closely describes the quality of the answer. Answers 
can display characteristics from more than one level, and where this happens markers must 
use the guidance below and their professional judgement to decide which level is most 
appropriate. 
For example, one stronger passage at L4 would not by itself merit a L4 mark, but it might be 
evidence to support a high L3 mark, unless there are substantial weaknesses in other areas. 
Similarly, an answer that fits best in L3 but which has some characteristics of L2 might be 
placed at the bottom of L3. An answer displaying some characteristics of L3 and some of L1 
might be placed in L2. 
 
2. Finding a mark within a level 
After a level has been decided on, the next stage is to decide on the mark within the level. 
The  instructions  below tell you  how to  reward responses  within  a level. However, where  a 
level has specific guidance about how to place an answer within a level, always follow that 
guidance. 
Levels containing two marks only 
Start with the presumption that the work will be at the top of the level. Move down to 
the lower mark if the work only just meets the requirements of the level. 
Levels containing three or more marks 
Markers should be prepared to use the full range of marks available in a level and not 
restrict marks to the middle. Markers should start at the middle of the level (or the upper-
middle mark if there is an even number of marks) and then move the mark up or down to 
find the best mark. To do this, they should take into account how far the answer meets the 
requirements of the level: 
• If it meets the requirements fully, markers should be prepared to award full marks 
within the level. The top mark in the level is used for answers that are as good as can 
realistically be expected within that level 
• If it only barely meets the requirements of the level, markers should consider awarding 
marks at the bottom of the level. The bottom mark in the level is used for answers 
that are the weakest that can be expected within that level 
• The middle marks of the level are used for answers that have a reasonable match to 
the descriptor. This might represent a balance between some characteristics of the level 
that are fully met and others that are only barely met. 
Indicative content 
Examiners are reminded that indicative content is provided as an illustration to markers of some 
of the material that may be offered by students. It does not show required content and 
alternatives should be credited where valid. 
 
  

 
Modern depth study: The USA, 1954-75: conflict at home and abroad 
Question 
 
1 
Give two things you can infer from Source A about the Ho Chi Minh Trail during the 
Vietnam War. 
Target: Source analysis (making inferences). 
AO3: 4 marks. 
Marking instructions 
Award 1 mark for each valid inference up to a maximum of two inferences. The second mark for each 
example should be awarded for supporting detail selected from the source. 
e.g. 
• The Ho Chi Minh Trail was not a formal route (1). The people are walking along uneven terrain; there 
is no clear path (1). 
• People carrying supplies along the Ho Chi Minh Trail were civilian supporters of the Vietcong (1).  
They did not have weapons (1). 
• The ground was so difficult that it needed supplies to be carried by individuals rather than being 
transported in wagons or motor vehicles (1). The supplies are being carried by individuals and the 
supplies are in baskets or on poles (1). 
Accept other appropriate alternatives. 
 
  

 
Question  
2 (a) 
Explain why the Montgomery Bus Boycott (1955-56) was successful. 
You may use the following in your answer: 
• Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA) 
• US Supreme Court 
You must also use information of your own. 
Target: Analysis of second order concepts: causation [AO2]; 
Knowledge and understanding of features and characteristics [AO1]. 
AO2: 6 marks. 
AO1: 6 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–3 
• A simple or generalised answer is given, lacking development and organisation. 
[AO2]  
• Limited knowledge and understanding of the topic is shown. [AO1] 
2 4–6 
• An explanation is given, showing limited analysis and with implicit or unsustained 
links to the conceptual focus of the question. It shows some development and 
organisation of material, but a line of reasoning is not sustained. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing some knowledge and 
understanding of the period. [AO1] 
3 7–9 
• An explanation is given, showing some analysis, which is mainly directed at the 
conceptual focus of the question. It shows a line of reasoning that is generally 
sustained, although some passages may lack coherence and organisation. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing good knowledge and 
understanding of the required features or characteristics of the period studied. 
[AO1] 
Maximum 8 marks for answers that do not address three or more aspects of 
content. 
4 10–12 
• An analytical explanation is given which is directed consistently at the conceptual 
focus of the question, showing a line of reasoning that is coherent, sustained and 
logically structured. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is precisely selected to address the question 
directly, showing wide-ranging knowledge and understanding of the required 
features or characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
No access to Level 4 for answers that do not address three or more aspects of 
content. 
  

 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Performance in AO1 and AO2 is interdependent. An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be 
awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should 
note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.  
The middle mark in each level may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. 
Relevant points may include: 
• The boycott was successful because the Montgomery Improvement Association was formed and 
organised the boycott to be city wide.  
• The boycott could be sustained for over a year because the MIA organised a system of carpools so 
that Black workers could get to work. 
• The federal district court ruled that segregation on the buses was illegal and this decision was upheld 
by the US Supreme Court, which led to the successful conclusion of the boycott. 
• The mass action of the boycott was so powerful that the bus company became bankrupt. 
• People united behind Rosa Parks because she was respected in the Black community.   
• The leadership of the boycott was successful in mobilising public opinion after the charismatic 
speaker, Martin Luther King, was elected president of the MIA, and public sympathy grew when the 
media publicised the arrests of the boycott leaders and the bombing of M L King’s home. 
 
  

 
Question  
2 (b) 
Explain why Black Power emerged in the 1960s. 
You may use the following in your answer: 
• Stokely Carmichael 
• Black culture 
You must also use information of your own. 
Target: Analysis of second order concepts: causation [AO2]; 
Knowledge and understanding of features and characteristics [AO1]. 
AO2: 6 marks. 
AO1: 6 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–3 
• A simple or generalised answer is given, lacking development and organisation. 
[AO2]  
• Limited knowledge and understanding of the topic is shown. [AO1] 
2 4–6 
• An explanation is given, showing limited analysis and with implicit or unsustained 
links to the conceptual focus of the question. It shows some development and 
organisation of material, but a line of reasoning is not sustained. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing some knowledge and 
understanding of the period. [AO1] 
3 7–9 
• An explanation is given, showing some analysis, which is mainly directed at the 
conceptual focus of the question. It shows a line of reasoning that is generally 
sustained, although some passages may lack coherence and organisation. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is included, showing good knowledge and 
understanding of the required features or characteristics of the period studied. 
[AO1] 
Maximum 8 marks for answers that do not address three or more aspects of 
content. 
4 10–12 
• An analytical explanation is given which is directed consistently at the conceptual 
focus of the question, showing a line of reasoning that is coherent, sustained and 
logically structured. [AO2] 
• Accurate and relevant information is precisely selected to address the question 
directly, showing wide-ranging knowledge and understanding of the required 
features or characteristics of the period studied. [AO1] 
No access to Level 4 for answers that do not address three or more aspects of 
content. 
 
  

 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Performance in AO1 and AO2 is interdependent. An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be 
awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should 
note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.  
The middle mark in each level may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. 
Relevant points may include: 
• Stokely Carmichael coined the term ‘Black Power’ in 1966, after becoming frustrated by the non-
violent approach of the SNCC and the slow progress of civil rights. 
• Black culture fostered a growing sense of identity among the Black community, with the emergence 
of Black Power emphasising being proud of Black ideals of beauty, Black literature, Black history, etc. 
• Black Power built upon the ideas of Malcolm X, which already had much support among the Black 
community whereas the influence of Martin Luther King was limited in the northern states. 
• The emergence of Black Power was boosted by the development of the Black Panther Party, creating 
a sense of community among Black Americans. 
• The ideas of Black Power fitted in with the counter-culture of the 1960s and therefore gained 
widespread support from young people.  
• The Black Power salute given by Tommie Smith and John Carlos at the Mexico Olympics in 1968 
gained international publicity and meant that Black Power emerged as a worldwide concept. 
  

 
Question  
3 (a) 
How useful are Sources B and C for an enquiry into the escalation of US 
involvement in the conflict in Vietnam in the 1960s?  
Explain your answer, using Sources B and C and your knowledge of the historical 
context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of source utility. 
AO3: 8 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple judgement on utility is given, and supported by undeveloped comment 
on the content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Simple comprehension 
of the source material is shown by the extraction or paraphrase of some 
content. Limited contextual knowledge is deployed with links to the sources. 
2 3–5 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, using valid 
criteria. Judgements are supported by developed comment related to the 
content of the sources and/or their provenance
1
. Comprehension and some 
analysis of the sources is shown by the selection and use of material to support 
comments on their utility. Contextual knowledge is used directly to support 
comments on the usefulness of the content of the sources and/or their 
provenance. 
3 6–8 
• Judgements on source utility for the specified enquiry are given, applying valid 
criteria with developed reasoning which takes into account how the provenance
1
 
affects the usefulness of the source content. The sources are analysed to 
support reasoning about their utility. Contextual knowledge is used in the 
process of interpreting the sources and applying criteria for judgements on their 
utility.  
Notes 
1. Provenance = nature, origin, purpose. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the sources. 
No credit may be given for generic comments on provenance which are not used to evaluate source 
content. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The grouping 
of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their answers.  
Source B  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• Source B makes it clear that President Kennedy was willing to commit the USA to increased 
involvement in Vietnam. 
• Source B suggests that Kennedy was willing to offer military support to the government of South 
Vietnam in a range of ways, e.g. air transport, equipment, and training. 
• The source suggests that Kennedy recognised other types of aid was needed for the government of 
South Vietnam to be successful in, and after, the war, e.g. advisers and economic aid. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The source provides valuable insight into Kennedy’s policies because the document was so important 
that it was classified as top secret.  
• The document was produced in 1961, early in Kennedy’s Presidency, and marked the start of the 
escalating involvement of the USA in Vietnam. 

 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• Kennedy felt under pressure to support the government in South Vietnam because he believed in the 
Domino Theory. 
• Kennedy sent ‘Green Beret’ special forces into Vietnam. 
Source C  
The usefulness could be identified in terms of the following points which could be drawn from the source: 
• Source C suggests that Johnson saw the need to increase the US fighting force in Vietnam as a 
defensive measure, in response to ‘aggression’. 
• Source C shows that President Johnson was willing to escalate US involvement in Vietnam in 
response to an assessment by the American military commander in Vietnam. 
• Source C suggests that Johnson was prepared to increase American involvement even further in the 
future and to increase conscription. 
The following points could be made about the authorship, nature or purpose of the source and applied to 
ascribe usefulness to material drawn from it:  
• The source comes from a speech by President Johnson, in which he was both explaining and 
justifying his policy to the public.  
• The source was produced shortly after US forces allegedly came under attack in the Gulf of Tonkin, 
which prompted a more aggressive policy from Johnson. 
Knowledge of the historical context should be deployed to support inferences and/or to assess the 
usefulness of information. Relevant points may include: 
• The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution said that Johnson could take any action necessary in Vietnam without 
the need for approval from Congress.  
• Johnson was seen by many as personally responsible for the dramatic increase in US involvement in 
Vietnam and mounting casualties. 
  

 
Question  
3 (b) 
Study Interpretations 1 and 2. They give different views about the escalation of US 
involvement in the conflict in Vietnam in the 1960s. What is the main difference 
between the views? Explain your answer, using details from both interpretations. 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (how they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• Limited analysis of the interpretations is shown by the extraction or paraphrase 
of some content, but differences of surface detail only are given, or a difference 
of view is asserted without direct support. 
2 3–4 
 
• The interpretations are analysed and a key difference of view is identified and 
supported from them. 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive and other relevant 
material not suggested below must also be credited. 
• A main difference is that Interpretation 1 suggests that Kennedy was responsible for increased US 
involvement in Vietnam, as shown by the way that military assistance to South Vietnam doubled 
and the number of advisers almost tripled. Interpretation 2, on the other hand, suggests that 
Johnson was responsible for the escalation of US involvement, including military bombing and the 
deployment of combat troops in Vietnam. 
  

 
Question  
3 (c) 
Suggest one reason why Interpretations 1 and 2 give different views about the 
escalation of US involvement in the conflict in Vietnam in the 1960s. You may use 
Sources B and C to help explain your answer. 
Target: Analysis of interpretations (why they differ). 
AO4: 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 
• A simple valid explanation is offered but displaying only limited analysis. Support 
for the explanation is based on simple undeveloped comment or on the selection 
of details from the provided material or own knowledge, with only implied 
linkage to the explanation. 
2 3–4 
• An explanation of a reason for difference is given, analysing the interpretations. 
The explanation is substantiated effectively.  
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. The indicative content below is not prescriptive. The examples below 
show different approaches to explaining difference, any one of which may be valid. Other valid material 
must be credited. 
• The interpretations may differ because the authors have given weight to different sources. For 
example. Source B gives details of Kennedy’s commitment to provide aid to the South Vietnamese 
government, which provides some support for Interpretation 1’s emphasis on the responsibility of 
Kennedy for US increasing involvement. However, Source C, suggesting that Johnson was prepared 
to commit increasing numbers of American troops, offers some support for Interpretation 2, which 
suggests that Johnson was responsible for an aggressive plan of escalating US involvement in actual 
combat. 
• The interpretations may differ because the authors are writing from different perspectives; the 
author of Interpretation 1 is focusing on an early stage of US involvement under Kennedy, while 
Interpretation 2 is explaining a later stage in the escalation of US involvement under Johnson. 
• They may differ because the authors have a different emphasis; the author of Interpretation 1 is 
focusing on the various types of US support Kennedy offered to the South Vietnamese government.  
Interpretation 2 is explaining the changed nature of US involvement created by Johnson’s 
commitment to armed forces. 
  

 
Question  
3 (d) 
How far do you agree with Interpretation 2 about the escalation of US 
involvement in the conflict in Vietnam in the 1960s? Explain your answer, 
using both interpretations, and your knowledge of the historical context. 
Target: Analysis and evaluation of interpretations. 
AO4: 16 marks. 
Spelling, punctuation, grammar and the use of specialist terminology 
(SPaG): up to 4 additional marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–4 
• Answer offers simple valid comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Limited analysis of one interpretation is shown by selection 
and inclusion of some detail in the form of simple paraphrase or direct 
quotation. Generalised contextual knowledge is included and linked to the 
evaluation. 
2 5–8 
• Answer offers valid evaluative comment to agree with or counter the 
interpretation. Some analysis is shown in selecting and including details 
from both interpretations to support this comment. Some relevant 
contextual knowledge is included and linked to the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given but its justification is insecure or undeveloped and a 
line of reasoning is not sustained. 
3 9–12 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation, agreeing or disagreeing with the 
interpretation. Good analysis of the interpretations is shown indicating 
difference of view and deploying this to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is used directly to support the evaluation. An overall 
judgement is given with some justification and a line of reasoning is 
generally sustained. 
4 13–16 
• Answer provides an explained evaluation reviewing the alternative views in 
coming to a substantiated judgement. Precise analysis of the 
interpretations is shown, indicating how the differences of view are 
conveyed and deploying this material to support the evaluation. Relevant 
contextual knowledge is precisely selected to support the evaluation. An 
overall judgment is justified and the line of reasoning is coherent, 
sustained and logically structured. 
Marks for SPaG 
Performance Mark Descriptor 
 0 
• The learner writes nothing. 
• The learner’s response does not relate to the question. 
• The learner’s achievement in SPaG does not reach the threshold 
performance level, e.g. errors in spelling, punctuation and grammar 
severely hinder meaning. 
Threshold 1 
• Learners spell and punctuate with reasonable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with some control of meaning and any 
errors do not significantly hinder meaning overall.  
• Learners use a limited range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
Intermediate 2–3 
• Learners spell and punctuate with considerable accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with general control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a good range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
High 4 
• Learners spell and punctuate with consistent accuracy. 
• Learners use rules of grammar with effective control of meaning overall. 
• Learners use a wide range of specialist terms as appropriate. 
  

 
Marking instructions 
Markers must apply the descriptors above in line with the general marking guidance (page 3). 
No credit may be given for contextual knowledge unless it is linked to evaluation of the interpretations. 
In all levels, the second sentence relates to analysis and while the rest relate to evaluation. The 
following rules will apply: 
• In Level 1, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis without evidence of 
evaluation should be awarded 1 mark. 
• In other levels, answers that meet the requirements only in relation to analysis (but that also fully 
meet the descriptors for evaluation of the level below) should be awarded no more than the bottom 
mark in the level. 
Indicative content guidance 
Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities 
outlined in the mark scheme. While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this 
does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited. The 
grouping of points below does not imply that this is how candidates are expected to structure their 
answers.  
The interpretation to be evaluated suggests that President Johnson was responsible for escalating US 
involvement in Vietnam into an aggressive war. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which support the claim made in the 
interpretation may include: 
• Interpretation 2 claims that Johnson was the president who was most responsible for escalating 
American involvement in Vietnam into a war of direct military combat. 
• Interpretation 2 states that Johnson was committed to an aggressive plan, which included the 
introduction of bombing and the use of ground troops.  
• Johnson used the Gulf of Tonkin incident as a reason for the escalation of US involvement in 
Vietnam. 
• Johnson continued to escalate US involvement in Vietnam, despite a growing number of protests. 
• Johnson approved the use of extensive bombing, e.g. Operation Rolling Thunder. 
Relevant points from the provided material and own knowledge which counter the view may include:  
• Interpretation 1 states that Kennedy’s commitment of the US to involvement in Vietnam was a 
turning point. 
• Interpretation 1 gives details of the extent of US involvement in Vietnam under Kennedy: 
assistance, advisers and using chemical weapons. 
• Kennedy wanted to appear strong against communism and was therefore willing to support a 
corrupt regime in South Vietnam. 
• American involvement under Kennedy included the policy of strategic hamlets. 
• Kennedy approved the use of defoliants such as Agent Orange, and herbicides such as Agent Blue, 
in an attempt to reduce support among the Vietnamese peasants for the Vietcong. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828  
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom 